A Glorious Garland of Great Bliss—the Fundamental, Female Practice of Tsogyal, the Queen of
Great Bliss, from the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse
revealed by Jigme Lingpa

Homage to the ḍākinī Queen of Great Bliss!
At the centre of a crescent maṇḍala with a single entrance,Place a red dharmodaya1 marked with
the sign of the deity.On top of it, place a skull-cup2 filled with madana,3Or with precious
substances and medicine.4On top of the skull-cup place a crystal and a mirror as the
support for the life-force.Around it, arrange outer and inner offerings.Then sit facing west.
1. Taking Refuge
namo, kyemé yeshe khandrö ku
Namo! Unborn, primordial wisdom5 is the body of the ḍākinī;
gakmé rangjung naljorma
Unceasing, naturally arisen is the yoginī;
gyalyum dorjé pakmo la
Mother of all the buddhas, Vajravārāhī,
dudral mepar kyab su chi
In you, beyond union and separation, I take refuge.6
Say this three times.
2. Arousing the Bodhicitta of Aspiration and Action
ho, di né changchub matob bar
Hoḥ! From now until I attain awakening,
yeshe khandro khyö drub né
I will practise you, the wisdom ḍākinī. Once I have accomplished your practice,
chokri dralwé semchen nam
I will establish all beings, impartially,
dechen sa la göpar gyi
In great bliss.
Say this three times.
3. Blessing the Offerings
om ah hung, ngöpor dzinpé namtok kün
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! All thoughts that involve clinging to phenomena as real
chinang sang sum chöpé trin
Are transformed into clouds of outer, inner and secret offerings.
küntu zangpö döyön ni
Just like the sensual delights of Samantabhadra,
namkha tabur dzepamé
They become inexhaustible, like the sky.
sarva pudza samaya ho
sarva-pūja samaya hoḥ
4. The Generation Phase According to Ati
ah, nangwa tamché yum ngé long
Āḥ! All appearances are the expanse of the five mothers.
sipa tamché khandrö dal
All that exists is the circle of ḍākinīs.
gyukyen lé dé shyalyé khang
The palace is beyond cause and condition.
tiklé nyakchik chöying go
The single entrance symbolises the single sphere7 of all-pervading space.
dechen barwé podrang ü
In the centre of the palace blazing with great bliss,
chukyé gesar shyepé teng
Upon the heart of a blossoming lotus
nyimé den la khandrö tso
And a sun-disc seat, stands the foremost of the ḍākinīs:
chökü long na kunzangmo
In the expanse of dharmakāya she is Samantabhadrī.
longkü shying na warahi
In the sambhogakāya realm she is Vajravārāhī,
tulku yeshe tsogyalma
And in the nirmāṇakāya form she is Yeshe Tsogyal.
shyal chik chak nyi kudok mar
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
chermo nyampé dortab chen
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
shintu chak dang shyepé shyal
Passionate and smiling,
chak yé töpé chang te’u
She holds in her right hand a small skull-drum,8
nyen gyi tekar tö ching trol
Which she plays at the level of her ear.
yönpa driguk yuwa ni
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
ku la ten né chok du gying
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
bhaga gyé shing numa bur
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
rinpoché dang shyönnü gyen
She is adorned with jewels and youthful ornaments
pundariké doshal chang
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers.9
rüpé gyen druk ku la dzé
The six bone ornaments adorn her body,10
nak num utré lentsar chen
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
rinpoché yi tsé dren ji
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
umé chen ni ying la zik
Her central eye gazes into all-encompassing space.
longkü chen gyi drowa dul
Her sambhogakāya eye tames beings.
tulkü chen gyi kham sum guk
Her nirmāṇakāya eye summons the three realms.
The body maṇḍala
ku la gyüdé kyilkhor dzok
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete.
tukka pal gyi beü ying
At her heart, the expanse of the glorious knot,11
makyé rangjung yongdrub lha
Are the unfabricated, naturally arisen, completely perfect deities.
khorlo tsib ngé tewa ru
At the centre of a five-spoked wheel
künshyi yi chö né dakpé
Is the pure nature of the all-ground consciousness, mind and phenomena:
khyab dal rigpa küntu zang
The all-pervading awareness is Samantabhadra.
nangtong nyimé yum dang jor
In union with his consort Samantabhadrī, they are appearance and emptiness indivisible.
tsib ngar zuk tsor dushé dang
On the five spokes are the deities of pure form, feeling, perception,
dujé namshé dakpé lha
Formation and consciousness:
namnang rinjung nang ta dang
Vairocana, Ratnasambhava, Amitābha,
döndrub dorjé mikyöpar
Amoghasiddhi and Vajrākṣobhya.
sa chu chen dang mamaki
They embrace the pure forms of earth, Locana; water, Māmakī;
mé lung gökar damtsik drol
Fire, Pāṇḍarāvasinī; air, Samayatārā; and
namkha ying kyi wangchuk ngar
Space, Dhātvīśvarī—
né dak rik kyi yum ngé tril
The consorts of the five families.
yé chok wangpö tsa shyi la
On the right side, in the four channels of the sense faculties
namshé dakpé nangsem shyir
Are the four inner bodhisattvas of the pure consciousnesses,
yul shyi dakpé sem mé tril
Who embrace the female bodhisattvas of the four pure objects.
mik la sa nying gekmoma
At the eye are Kṣitigarbha and Lāsyā,
nawar chakdor luma nyi
At the ear, Vajrapāṇi and Gītā,
na la namnying trengwamo
At the nose, Ākāśagarbha and Mālā,
ché la chenrezik garma
And at the tongue, Avalokiteśvara and Nṛtyā.
yön chok wangpö tsa shyi la
On the left side, in the four channels of the sense faculties
wangpö dakpé chi sem shyir
Are the four outer bodhisattvas of the pure sense faculties.
dü shyi dakpé semmé tril
They embrace the female bodhisattvas of the four pure times.
mik la jampa dukpöma
At the eye are Maitreya and Dhūpā,
nawar dribsel metokchen
At the ear, Nīvaraṇaviṣkambhin and Puṣpā,
na la kunzang aloké
At the nose, Samantabhadra and Ālokā,
ché la jampal drichabma
And at the tongue, Mañjuśrī and Gandhā.
tralwa ché dang nyinga dang
At the forehead, tongue, heart,
tewa sangné kangtil yön
Navel, secret place, and on the sole of the left foot
jikten druk dang nyönmong nga
Are the pure nature of the views of the six realms and the five afflictions,
sernar tawa né dakpé
Together with miserliness—
rigpe kyebu tubpa druk
They are the learned beings, the six munis.
yenlak shyi la semchen gyi
At the four limbs are
lü kyi nampar shepa dang
The natural purity of the body's consciousness,
wangpo rekja rek shé shyi
Sense faculty, objects of touch and tactile cognition—
né dak gowa yab shyi la
The four male doorkeepers.
takché ta dang dak ta dang
They embrace the purity of the views of eternalism, nihilism, self,
tsenmar tawa né dak yul
And the view of characteristics—the female doorkeepers.
lak yé shinjé chakkyu ma
On the right hand are Yama and Aṅkuśā,
yönpar tobchen shyakpamo
On the left hand, Mahābala and Pāśā,
kang yön tamdrin chakdrokma
On the left foot, Hayagrīva and Śriṅkhalā,
yepar dütsi khyil drilbu
And on the right foot, Amṛtakuṇḍalī and Ghaṇtā.
tsemé shyi trinlé chen
They carry out the enlightened activity of the four immeasurables.
dakja dak jé dzokpa lé
Thus by completing the purification of the objects to be purified,
yongdrub den sum tsangwé lha
The consummate deities of the three seats of completeness12
nang la rangshyin mepar sal
Appear, vivid yet empty.
dé yi bapü buga la
Within the pores of her body
traktung gyüdé kyilkhor ni
The heruka-maṇḍalas of all classes of tantra
malü lüpa mepar dzok
Are wholly and completely perfected, without exception.
kün kyang kudok chaktsen dang
All their manifestations in different colours,
namgyur ma ngé gyuntrul ni
Their various implements and forms
rangjung rang shar chenpo’o
Are the great illusion that originates from itself and arises naturally.
bumtrak yangpé khandrö kor
She is surrounded by a vast assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs.

rikdak pema tö treng tsal
The lord of the families is Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland.13
atsarya shyön karsal dzum
The youthful ācārya has a light complexion and is smiling.
herukapa chang dril trol
He appears in the form of a heruka and plays a small skull-drum and bell.
damtsik yeshe nyi sumé
The samaya and wisdom deities are indivisible.
gompa tsam gyi ngödrub tob
Merely by meditating on them I gain accomplishment.
Samaya!
5. Inviting With a Mind Full of Longing
hung, yul gyi ming ni gyagar yul
Hūṃ! In the country known as India,
né kyi chokgyur urgyen né
Lie the supremely sacred land of Uḍḍiyāna
dhumata la khandrö drong
And Dhumathala, its citadel of ḍākinīs,
ling gi ling chok ngayab ling
And also Cāmaradvīpa, the supreme island among islands.
dönla womin dechen shying
In reality they are the Unsurpassed,14 pure realm of great bliss,
nampa khachö trulpé né
Yet they appear as emanated celestial realms.
gyé shing shyukpé yul kün né
From all those places where you joyfully reside,
chöku yumchen tsogyalma
Great dharmakāya mother Tsogyal,
bumtrak khandrö khor dang ché
Together with your retinue of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs,
jingyi lab chir shek su sol
Come! Inspire me with your blessings—
né chok diru jin pob la
Shower down your blessings on this supreme place!
drub chok dak la wang shyi kur
Grant me, a supreme practitioner, the four empowerments!
gek dang lokdren barché sol
Remove any obstacle-makers, misleading guides and hindrances!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant me the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
om ah hung benzajnana dakini é arali pem pem dza
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-jñāna-ḍākiṇi e a ra li pheṃ pheṃ jaḥ
6. Requesting the Deities to Be Seated, and Paying Homage
ho, döné damtsik yeshepa
Hoḥ! From the very beginning, the samaya and wisdom deity
nyi su mepa dorjé ten
Are indivisible, like the vajra seat.
khandro sem kyi chotrul du
To the ḍākinī, the miraculous manifestation of mind,
lhen chik kyé la chaktsal lo
And innate, primordial wisdom, I pay homage!
namo nama hung
namo nama hūṃ
7. The Offering of Sensory Delights
ho, nang shying sipé chö so chok
Hoḥ! All phenomena of appearance and existence
döyön nga yi gyen du shar
Arise as the ornaments of the five sensory delights.
sem kyi yishyin terchenpo
This great wish-fulfilling treasure of the mind,
langdor mepé gyé chö bul
A delightful offering beyond accepting or rejecting, I offer!
benza jnana dakini pushpé dhupé aloké gandhé naiwadya shapta | mahamudra rakta pentsa balingta
sarva pudza ah hung
vajra-jñāna-dākiṇi puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda mahāmudre rakta pañca baliṅ te sarvapūjā
āḥ hūṃ
8. Praise and Aspiration
hung, gyalwa kün yum dorjé naljorma
Hūṃ! Vajrayoginī, mother of all buddhas,
natsok yum gyur sherab parol chin
Prajñāpāramitā, universal mother,
gyé chak shyepé namgyur tso gyal yum
Mother Tsogyal—joyful, passionate and smiling—
sangye peme cham la chaktsal tö
Buddha Padmasambhava’s consort, to you I pay homage!

tongwé yi trok tsenpé langtsochen
Your body is ravishing and youthful, and adorned with the major and minor marks.
töpé namdrol gakmé da yi sung
Your speech, ceaseless and symbolic, liberates upon hearing.
drenpé detong yeshe kyepé tuk
Your mind evokes the primordial wisdom of bliss and emptiness through mere recollection.
dakki jemo kharchen za la tö
Queen of the ḍākinīs, princess of Kharchen,15 to you I pay homage!

chudruk ga ter chok gi ponyamö
Most excellent consort who grants the sixteen joys,
sal nang gyumé tingdzin dang drokpé
By concentrating on your illusory yet clear appearance,
chinang shyen sum tsalung tiklé kham
May the outer, inner and other, and the elements of channels, wind-energies and essences,
küntu zangmö long du dak gyur chik
Be purified into the expanse of Samantabhadrī.

9. The Recitation that Brings Accomplishment
rangnyi khandrö tukka ru
I am the ḍākinī. In my heart
pakmo ting nak dri tö chen
Is Vārāhī, dark blue in colour and holding a hooked knife and skull-cup.
nying ü gakhyil bam tsen tar
In her heart is a coil of joy, in the centre of which is the syllable vaṃ,
ngak treng khorwé özer gyi
Encircled by the mantra garland; it revolves, emitting light rays that
lha kü nang shyen salwar jé
Illuminate and enhance the appearance of the deities;
rikdak lamé tuk gyü kul
It invokes the wisdom mind of the guru, the lord of the families,
dé lé ö trö dön nyi jé
Who sends out rays of light that accomplish the twofold benefit.
lamé ku lé dütsi gyün
From the guru’s body, a stream of ambrosia,
zakmé dewa chenpor bab
Undefiled great bliss, flows down.
gawa shyi yi jelé kyi
Through the power of the four joys,
wang shyi yeshe nyam su nyong
The primordial wisdom of the four empowerments is experienced.
The root mantra:
om padmo yogini jnana varahi hung
oṃ padmo-yoginī-jñāna-vārāhī hūṃ
Then, focusing on the body maṇḍala:
om guhya jnana bodhitsitta maha sukha rulu rulu hung bhyo hung
oṃ guhya-jñāna bodhicitta-mahāsukha rulu rulu hūṃ bhyo hūṃ
The crucial point is to rest in meditative equipoise on the nature of reality, in which there
is neither granting nor receiving of the royal vase empowerment. There is no need to rely
on a vast number of practices of the generation and completion phases—through this practice
alone, you will reach accomplishment. Samaya!
Although signs of accomplishment are inconceivable in number, the supreme sign is to possess
an unwavering wisdom mind. The common signs include the gathering of ḍākinīs; all perceptions
arising as symbols and dharmakāya, the result of having plumbed the depths of the primordial
wisdom of all things in their multiplicity; becoming joyful and relaxed, and awareness
being lucid and clear; obtaining the eight accomplishments, such as being able to dwell
in celestial realms; in dreams, seeing women of red colour gather, finding flowers, conch
shells, cowries and white crystals, and seeing arrows and other implements of deities.
These are explained as signs that you have accomplished the ḍākinī. The instructions that
explain how to apply the various activities can be found in other texts. Samaya.
The Concluding Stages: The Feast and Fulfilment Offering
Of all the methods for accumulating merit, the feast-gathering is supreme. The samaya substances
that attract the ḍākinīs, and especially the inner offerings, should be perfectly arranged.
Blessing the offerings
ho, dewa chenpö nö chok tu
Hoḥ! In the wondrous vessel vessel of great bliss
tsok kyi khorlö longchö ni
Are arranged the delights of the feast-offering,
langdor mepé damtsik dzé
The samaya substances that are free from accepting and rejecting.
om ah hung gi dütsir gyur
With oṃ āḥ hūṃ they are transformed into ambrosia.
Inviting and Offering
Arrange the first portion of the feast offering in three parts.
hung, womin né dang khachö shying
Hūṃ! The Unsurpassed and the other celestial realms,
pawo khandro duwé né
The sacred places where the heroic ones16 and ḍākinīs gather,
nyishu tsashyi trulpé yul
The twenty-four emanated places,17
nang tar dorjé pungpö drong
Are inwardly the cities of our vajra body.
The Wheel of Mind18
chiwor dzalandhara dang
The crown of the head is Jālandhara,19
mintsam pulliramala
The point between the eyebrows is Pullīramalaya,20
takpé tsa kham arbuta
The channels and elements at the back of the neck are Arbuda,
dzöpu rameshora dang
The ūrṇā21 is Rāmeśvara,
nawa yepa orgyen yul
The right ear is the land of Uḍḍiyāna,
yönpa godhawari shying
The left is the realm of Godāvarī,
mik nyi dewikota dang
The two eyes are Devīkoṭa,
trakpa malawa gyé na
And the shoulders are Mālava. You who dwell in these eight places—
shyukpé pawo naljorma
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
khandro dang ni khadroma
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
tsok kyi duwar shek su sol
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
utra tortsuk dem sé dem
Your top-knots swaying,
changlö zarbu talala
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
nyen cha dubu kyilili
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
rügyen yerkha trololo
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
chang té'u drilbü dra dang ché
With small skull-drums and bells resounding,
dorjé lu dang gar la rol
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
döyön longchö tsok su bul
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
We confess our impairments of samaya!
chinang bar chö ying su drol
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
The Wheel of Speech 22
longchö khorlor lampaka
The wheel of enjoyment23 is Lampāka,
chen dang khalkhung kamaru
The armpits and kidneys are Kāmarūpa,
numa nyi ni oti té
The two breasts are Oḍra,
tewa trishakuné drong
The navel is Triśakuni,
na yi tsemo kosala
The tip of the nose is Kośala,
yaken kalingka yi yul
The palate24 is the land of Kaliṅga,
nyinga kantsika dang ni
And the heart is Kāñcī,
himala yi drongkhyer na
And Himālaya.25 You who dwell in these eight places—
shyukpé pawo naljorma
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
khandro dang ni khadroma
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
tsok kyi duwar shek su sol
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
utra tortsuk dem sé dem
Your top-knots swaying,
changlö zarbu tala la
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
nyen cha dubu kyi li li
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
rügyen yerkha trololo
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
chang té'u drilbü dra dang ché
Small skull-drums and bells resounding,
dorjé lu dang gar la rol
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
döyön longchö tsok su bul
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
We confess our impairments of samaya!
chinang bar chö ying su drol
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
The Wheel of the Body26
tsenma pretapuri shying
The genitals are the land of Pretapurī,
shanglam grihadewé yul
The anus is the land of Gṛhadevatā,27
tebong maro la rashta
The big toes are Maru and the thighs are Saurāṣṭra,
jinpa suvarnadipa
The calves are Suvarṇadvīpa,
sormo chudruk nagara
The sixteen fingers and toes are Nagara,28
pümo kulanta dang ni
The knees are Kulatā,
bolgong sindhü drongkhyer na
And the ankles are Sindhu. You who dwell in these eight places—
shyukpé pawo naljorma
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
khandro dang ni khadroma
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
tsok kyi duwar shek su sol
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
utra tortsuk dem sé dem
Your top-knots swaying,
changlö zarbu tala la
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
nyen cha dubu kyi li li
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
rügyen yerkha trololo
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
chang té'u drilbü dra dang ché
With small skull-drums and bells resounding,
dorjé lu dang gar la rol
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
döyön longchö tsok su bul
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
We confess our impairments of samaya!
chinang bar chö ying su drol
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
Confession
To add a fulfilment practice to the feast, recite the following:
ho, yeshe khandrö lhatsok gong su sol
Hoḥ! Assembly of wisdom ḍākinīs, turn your attention towards me!
döchak shyedang timuk wang gyurpé
Under the sway of attachment, aversion and ignorance,
lü ngak sem kyi dik ché tol shying shak
I have committed misdeeds of body, speech and mind, which I openly acknowledge and confess.
tekpa menpé wang du gyurpé na
Under the influence of the lower vehicle,
yangdak dön matokpa tol lo shak
I have not realized the authentic truth, which I openly admit and confess.
nyingjé chung shying shyedang wang gyurpé
Since I have little compassion and have fallen under the control of anger,
drowé dön ma gyipa tol shying shak
I have failed to act for the benefit of beings, which I openly admit and confess.
lelo nyi kyi wang du gyurpa yi
Under the influence of laziness and sleep,
gom dang drubpa yelwa tol shying shak
I have strayed from meditation and practice, which I openly admit and confess.
serna jur gek wang du gyurpé na
Under the influence of miserliness and stinginess,
chöpa lodar depa tol shying shak
I have failed to make monthly or annual offerings, which I openly admit and confess.
ngagyal khengsem wang du gyurpé na
Under the influence of pride and arrogance,
lamé ku sung tuk dang galwa shak
I have gone against my guru’s body, speech and mind, which I openly admit and confess.
tsé dung chungwé wang du gyurpé na
Lacking love and affection,
drokché tuk dang galwa tol shying shak
I have annoyed my friends and spiritual brothers and sisters, which I openly admit and confess.
da drok ngenpé wang du gyurpé na
Having fallen under the influence of bad companions,
pü dang lhakmar gyurpa tol shying shak
I have spoiled the first portion and turned it into the remainder, which I openly admit and
confess.
pü dang lhakma nyampé kyön wang gi
Through the fault of degrading the first portion and turning it into the remainder,
pü nyul tuk dang galwa tol shying shak
I have displeased those who relish the first portion, which I openly admit and confess.
pü nyul tuk dang galwé kyen wang gi
Having displeased those who relish the first portion,
khandrö kaché né gyur tol lo shak
I have incurred the harsh retribution commanded by the ḍākinīs, which I openly admit and confess.
drolwé dü na nyingjé chungwa yi
When performing the liberation, owing to my meagre compassion,
semchen né matobpa tol lo shak
I lacked the strength to deliver beings to a better place, which I openly admit and confess.
nyönmong né matobpé kyön wang gi
Having failed to liberate the afflictions,
yün gyi dribpar gyurpa tol lo shak
I have turned them into long-lasting obscurations, which I openly admit and confess.
jorwé dü su tingdzin masalwé
During the practice of union, since my meditative concentration lacked strength,
zungmé tuk dang galwa zöpar sol
I have displeased my consort, which I openly admit and confess.
zungmé tuk dang galwé kyön wang gi
Having displeased the consort,
chak shing khorwar kyewa tol lo shak
I have developed attachment and the cause for rebirth in saṃsāra, which I openly admit and confess.
shak né ku sung tuk kyi ngödrub tsol
Now that I have confessed, please grant the accomplishments of enlightened body, speech and
mind!
By confessing from the depth of your heart, the impairments and breakages of samaya will be
repaired.
Dedicating the Remainder Offering
Spit on the remainder offering.29
om akaro mukham sarva dharmanam adyanutpannatota om ah hung pé soha
oṃ ākāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
pem, lhak la wangwé kanyen ni
Peṃ! All you attendants who share in the remainder and carry out the commands:
khandro sumchu tsa nyi dang
The thirty-two ḍākinīs,
ging chen khyo shuk langka bum
The great kiṃkara with consorts and laṅkā spirits in your hundreds of thousands,
ponya sumgya drukchü dé
The three hundred sixty classes of messengers,
gyokma shyi dang barma gyé
The Four Swift Ones and Eight Blazing Ones,
mamo dün dang singmo shyi
Seven Mātṛkās and Four Sisters,
shukdro né nyul tramen nam
The forceful, roaming and therianthropic spirits—30
lhak la dung shying tsokkhang drim
You who crave leftovers and roam the assembly halls,
pampab zangpo di shyé la
Please accept this excellent remainder!
mitün kyen ngen barché sol
Dispel all unfavourable, negative circumstances and obstacles!
cholwé trinlé drubpar dzö
Accomplish the activities entrusted to you, this is our request!
Take the remainder offering outside.
Invoking the Sacred Pledge
hung, shyeng shik khandro düpé lha
Hūṃ! Rise up, all you deities of the ḍākinī assembly!
chö kyi ying né kur shyeng la
Out of all-pervading space, arise in bodies of form!
changchub drubpé barché tul
Crush any obstacles to our accomplishment of awakening!
nöchü jungwé güpa sol
Halt the degeneration of the elements in the environment and beings!
tsalung wangtang nyampa sö
Heal any weakness in our channels, wind-energies and authentic presence!31
drubpé drebu chipar dzö
Cause our practice to bear fruition!
Invoking the Covenant
hung, dü sum lé dé küntu zang
Hūṃ! Samantabhadra, you transcend the three times.
rangshyin namdak womin du
In the naturally pure realm of The Unsurpassed,
den sum tsangpé tönkhor gyi
You, the teacher, in the presence of the retinue of the three seats of completeness,
sang chen dorjé chö khor kor
Turned the wheel of the extremely secret, indestructible Dharma.
ngö dzin dakpé lha né sum
The three realms of the gods who are free from clinging to phenomena as real32
gyüdé jungwé né su ten
Are proclaimed as the places from where the classes of tantra originate.
ngak ni léchen trulpé ngor
In the perception of fortunate, emanated beings, the teachings of mantra
rangshyin nyi du jungwé tsé
Appear naturally. On one such occasion,
drakda tsogyal latso ru
At Tsogyal Latso lake near Dragda,33
palden rangjung dorjé gyü
The mind of the glorious Rangjung Dorje34
né sum khandrö jinlab shing
Was blessed by the ḍākinīs of the three places.
sé len mepé dayik lé
With neither attachment nor grasping, he deciphered the symbolic script
dzemé ter gyi go ché tsé
And revealed this inexhaustible treasure. Immediately,
trulpa shyi la dakpa yi
Delusions were purified in the ground.
tendrel shyindu trinlé dzö
In keeping with these auspicious circumstances, carry out the activities!
Maintaining the Relationship with the Immovable Goddesses
hung, pal gyi kanyen bö kham kyong
Hūṃ! You, attendants who obey the command of the Glorious One and protect the realm of Tibet,
ma sing tenma chunyi nam
Mātṛkās and sisters—Twelve Immovable Goddesses,35
dir jön tormé shalchu shyé
Come and accept the torma’s cleansing water,
cholwé trinlé drubpar dzö
And carry out the activities we request of you!
ma ma hring hring balingta khahi
ma ma hriṃ hriṃ baliṅ te khāhi
The Horse Dance36
hung, yeshe khandrö kyilkhor dir
Hūṃ! In this maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
lokpar drenpé damsi kün
All spirits who cause us to break our samaya and lead us astray37
nen no tekpa rim gü gya
Are suppressed, buried beneath the seal of the nine yānas.
namyang dangwar magyur chik
Let them never rise again!
tom bhayanen
sthaṃ bha ya nen

Recite the offerings and praise here.
Receiving the Accomplishments
ho, khandro drubpé damtsik danang tem
Hoḥ! Right now, this very morning, the samayas of the ḍākinī practice have been fulfilled!
ngödrub tsolwé dü la da bab na
Now the time has come to grant us the accomplishments!
mi né yeshe tuk kyi kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍala of the non-abiding, primordial wisdom,
ku sung tuk dang nyam jor wang chü tob
Grant us the union with your enlightened body, speech and mind, and the ten powers and strengths—
danta nyi du dak la tsal du sol
Now, this very instant!
om padmo yogini jnana varahi benza kaya waka tsitta sarva siddhi pala ho
oṃ padmo-yoginī-jñāna-vārāhi vajra-kāya-vākka-citta-sarva-siddhi-phala hoḥ
The accomplishment substances are tasted and then touched to the three places
Confession of Mistakes
hung, yeshe khandrö kyilkhor du
Hūṃ! In the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
chödzé matsang drubpa yel
If our offerings were not complete, or our practice was inattentive,
tingdzin jing muk tib la sok
Our meditation drowsy, dull and lifeless,
gal trul nongpa zöpar sol
Forgive all such confusion and mistakes, I pray!
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra.
om benza sato samaya | manupalaya | benza sato tenopa tishta dridho mé bhava | sutokhayo mé
bhava | supokhayo mé bhava | anurakto mé bhava | sarva siddhi mé prayaccha | sarva karma su
tsa mé | tsittam shreyang | kuru hung | ha ha ha ha ho | bhagavan | sarva tatagata benza
ma mé muntsa benzi bhava maha samaya sato ah
oṃ vajrasatvasamayam anupālaya vajrasatva tvenopatiṣṭha ḍṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo
me bhava anurakto me bhava sarvasiddhiṃ me prayaccha sarvakarmasu ca me cittaṃ śreyaḥ
kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavan sarvatathāgatavajra mā me muñca vajrī bhava mahāsamayasattva
āḥ
Completion Phase
ho, chu lé chubur dolwa shyin
Hoḥ! Like bubbles appearing on water,
rang lé trulpé kyilkhor lha
The deities of the maṇḍala, created by myself,
yeshe ying su benza mu
Dissolve into the all-pervading space of primordial wisdom—vajra muḥ!
jetob gyumé lha kur dang
In the post-meditation, everything arises as the illusory body of the deity.
Dedication of Merit
ho, khandroma yi kyilkhor du
Hoḥ! In the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
kyedzok dejö gyipa yi
By practising the generation and completion phases and recitations,
gewé tsawa gang lakpa
Whatever sources of merit I have
dro kün sangye tob chir ngo
I dedicate to the enlightenment of all beings!
Aspiration
ho, nangsi tamché dakpa khachö shying
Hoḥ! All that appears and exists is the celestial realm and
dechen gyurmé dorjé naljorma
Vajrayoginī, unchanging great bliss.
namkün chokden dön gyi pakmo dang
Vajravārāhī, truly blessed with the most sublime of qualities,
rang shyal jal té ngönpar changchub shok
May we see your true face and attain enlightenment!
Prayer for Auspiciousness
om yé dharma hetu prabhava hetun teshan tatagato hyavadat | teshan tsa yo nirodha evam vadi
maha shramana soha
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhavā hetun teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ
svāhā
ho, rikdzin gyüpé jinlab dang
Hoḥ! Through the blessing of the lineage of the vidyādharas,
könchok sum gyi denpa dang
And through the truth of the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha,
sangngak zabmö tendrel gyi
And through the auspicious interdependence of the profound Secret Mantrayāna:
jikgyé shyiwé tashi shok
May all be auspicious, to pacify the eight fears!
tsesö gyepé tashi shok
May all be auspicious, for developing life and merit!
nangwa wang dü tashi shok
May all be auspicious, to bring perception under our control!
lokdren tsar chö tashi shok
May all be auspicious, to annihilate negative, misleading forces!
nang shyen lha kü chakgyar dzok
With all attachment to perception transformed and perfected as the form of the deity,
drar drak dechen ngak su dak
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
dren tok ösal chökur min
All thoughts matured into the luminosity of dharmakāya—
ja lü zangtal tashi shok
May all be auspicious, so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!
Recite other prayers for auspiciousness, whether long or short. Samaya!
Sealed with the treasure seal, the symbolic seal and the profound seal!
I, Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa, discovered this at Tsogyal Latso lake in Dragda. I received the symbolic
scripts from the heart of the ḍākinī Rangjung Gyalmo, without grasping at them or hankering
after them, and then deciphered them. Later, I arranged them into a practice text.

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Jeremy Tattersall, 2019. The translator primarily followed
the Raṭik commentary and is also indebted to Tulku Thondup’s pioneering translation of
the same text. Some sections were adapted from Rigdzin Düpa by Rigpa Translations. With
gratitude to Dakpo Tulku Rinpoche for his clarifications and to Stefan Mang for numerous suggestions.
↑ Literally, 'the source (udaya) of all phenomena (dharma)'. It is triangular in shape and represents
the space out of which all phenomena arise. Often two triangles are combined to
form a star (like the Star of David) known as ‘a crossed dharmodaya’,↑ Literally, a ‘bliss-sustainer’,
a synonym that probably derives from a Sanskrit etymology of the word kapāla.↑
I.e., alcohol.↑ Medicine here means ambrosia (Skt. amṛta).↑ Skt. jñāna, Tib. yeshe. It can
also be translated as ‘pristine cognition’.↑ The Tibetan language is often ambiguous in
that it can be interpreted in several ways. Here it is unclear whether to use a single or
plural pronoun (i.e., 'I', 'we' or 'they'). We have chosen to use the singular pronoun in
the first section of the sādhana, but to use the plural for the section on the feast-gathering,
since that is a practice that is often done in a group.↑ Tib. tiklé nyakchik (thig
le nyag gcig)↑ Tib. chang té'u↑ Skt. puṇḍarīka↑ The Illuminating the Meaning of Tantra: A
Commentary on the Sādhana of Yumka, the Queen of Great Bliss, by Ratön Ngawang Tendzin Dorje
(in short called the Ratik commentary), says these are: 1) a bone ring for the crown, 2)
earrings, 3) a necklace, 4) anklets and bracelets for the ankles, wrists and upper arms,
5) a girdle and 6) a sacred Brahmanic thread.↑ Skt. śrīvatsa↑ Often referred to as the maṇḍala
of the three seats of completeness. The three seats are 1) the aggregates (skandha)
and elements (dhātu), 2) the sense fields (āyatana), and 3) limbs (aṅga). In 1) reside the
tathāgatas, in 2) reside the male and female bodhisattvas, and in 3) reside the male and
female wrathful deities.↑ Tib. Pema Tötreng Tsal, in other words, Padmasambhava.↑ Skt. Akaniṣṭha↑
Kharchen (mkhar chen) is the name of the clan into which Yeshe Tsogyal was born.↑
Skt vīra; Tib. pawo (dpa’ bo)↑ There are slightly different enumerations of the twenty-four
sacred places in accordance with different tantras such as the Hevajra Tantra and the Cakrasaṃvara
Tantra. Here the most renowned tradition of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra is followed.
↑ Skt. cittacakra↑ For the twenty-four sacred places, see David B. Gray, The Cakrasamvara
Tantra: A Study and Annotated Translation (American Institute of Buddhist Studies, 2007),
pages 54-62.↑ In the tradition of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra Pullīramalaya is associated with
the head. This seems to be the only minor difference between the enumeration here and in
the tradition of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra.↑ Skt. ūrṇākośa; a circle of hair between the eyebrows,
one of the thirty-two major marks of a buddha.↑ Skt. vākcakra↑ I.e., the throat↑
In the tradition of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra the mouth is mentioned at this point.↑ Perhaps
it is no coincidence that the part of the body that correlates with Himālaya is left out,
since there seem to have been various opinions about it in the tradition of the Cakrasaṃvara
Tantra. It might be the perineum.↑ Skt. kāyacakra↑ The actual place name might be Pañcāla.↑
Although it might seem odd to interpret this line as a reference to anything other than
sixteen fingers and toes, Ratön Ngawang Tendzin Dorje says that it refers only to the
eight (‘half of sixteen’) toes. This makes sense because the places mentioned in the body
wheel correspond to the lower torso, legs, and feet. Ratön Ngawang Tendzin Dorje might have
been aware that his interpretation would prove controversial, since he offers additional
quotes from the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra and the Commentary on the Vajraḍākinī in support of his
point.↑ It should be noted that this is only to be attempted by a highly realized vajra
master; indeed, even such an adept would most likely refrain—in which case, as in the absence
of such a realized vajra master, ambrosia is used in place of saliva.↑ Spirits with a
human body and an animal head, Tib. Tramen (phra men).↑ Tib. Wangtang (dbang thang).↑ In
his word-by-word commentary, Gönpo Tseten Rinpoche says that these are the Five Pure Heavens,
the Joyous Realm (Skt. Tuṣita), and the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.↑ The valley of Drak,
or Dragda (sgrags mda’), the birthplace of Yeshe Tsogyal, is located about thirty kilometres
south-east of Lhasa.↑ I.e., Jigme Lingpa↑ Skt. sthāvarā, Tib. Tenma (brtan/bstan ma).↑
I.e., the dance of Hayagrīva.↑ The damsi (dam sri) spirits mentioned in this line are a
type of si spirit originating from practitioners who break their samaya.