A Glimpse of the Crucial Points1
The Vidyādhara's Manual of Concealed Instructions (Gabjang)
from the Longchen Nyingtik

I prostrate to the ocean of vidyādharas of the sign transmission!
These are the concealed aspects of the Vidyādhara practice.
1. Concealed Instruction on the Wisdom Deity
The wisdom deity (jñānasattva) is concealed within the main deity:
nangsi zilnön tukka ru
In the heart of Padmasambhava, subduer of all that appears and exists,
rigdzin gyalpo dorjé chö
Is the king of vidyādharas, Vajradharma:
kudok jérur num kü tar
His body coral-coloured, as if anointed with oil,
saltser trakdang denpa la
Glistening and radiant, with a glowing complexion.
shyal chik chak nyi shyima tro
With one face and two hands, semi-wrathful,
cherbu rügyen tortsuk chen
Naked, with bone ornaments and topknot,
dorjé drilbu nolwé pang
He holds vajra and bell intertwined; on his lap
naljor ngönmo dri töchen
The blue yoginī, holding hooked knife and skull-cup,
chaluk yab dra nyika yang
Her adornments matching those of her consort.
shintu chakpé namgyur chen
They reside in a state of intense desire,
zakmé dewa chenpor jor
Joined in uncontaminated great bliss.
tukkar pema nyidé teng
At my heart, upon a lotus, sun and moon
hung yik tinggé takor du
The blue letter hūṃ, and around it
ngak treng pushé tabü kor
Revolves the mantra mālā,2 as fine as if written by a single hair.
özer tröpé nöchü jang
From it rays of light stream out, purifying the environment and all beings.
namdak lha yi dal du gom
Perceiving everything purely in the natural space of Padmasambhava—
madrub bardu mitang ngo
Until this is actualized, I shall not let go of the practice!
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
Just as the most precious thing for a human being is consciousness, for all the forms of the
symbolic mudrā of the deity, it is the majestic jñānasattva, visualized with extreme clarity
and stability—this is crucial. Samaya!
2. Concealed Instruction on the Mantra
For the concealment in the mantra, do as follows: having recited the approach mantra 1,200,000
times, recite the mantra of the essence of the life-force practice of the vidyādharas,
which starts with oṃ, and ends with hūṃ, and which has twelve syllables elegantly nestled
in-between. This is the innermost essence of the life-force of the vidyādharas.
The Mahāguru Mantra
om ah hung benza maha guru sarva siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra mahāguru sarva siddhi hūṃ
By reciting this 1,200,000 times you will gain accomplishment. Samaya!
3. Concealed Instruction on the Palanquin Samādhi
Now, for the concealed instruction on the ‘palanquin’ samādhi, when you gain clarity and stability
in your visualization of the deity, consider the following:
tukké ngak treng yé kor lé
From the mantra mālā turning clockwise at his heart,
ngak treng lugu gyü du trö
Streams out a mantra mālā, like a chain,
yeshe sempé shyal né tön
Which emerges from the mouth of the wisdom being.
yum gyi shyal shyuk kü yib gyü
Entering the female consort’s mouth, it descends through her body,
tukké bam la yön du khor
Revolves anti-clockwise around the vaṃ at her heart
khasang norbü lam gyü dé
And descends through ‘the jewel path of the secret space’.
galmé tabur khorwa yi
As the mantra mālā revolves, like a firebrand,
yabyum dewa chenpö nyam
The male and female deities experience great bliss,
zödu mépa barwa lé
Which blazes up, overwhelmingly, and causes
tukjé özer küntu trö
Rays of compassionate light to stream out in all directions.
tso dang khor ché tamché kyang
The chief deities of the maṇḍala, along with their retinues,
detong yeshe nyam urwé
Increase their experience of the wisdom of bliss and emptiness;
chang teu drilbu trololo
Hand-drum and bell rattle and ring,
shyal né hung lu kyururu
From their mouths resonates the murmuring song of hūṃ.
yingrik nyimé changchub sem
Bodhicitta, the indivisibility of space and awareness,
tsalnang dakpa rabjam kyi
The infinite purity of all experience and perception—
kyilkhor chik tu dzokpa la
In the complete perfection of this one maṇḍala
rigpa té dé yomé shyak
Rest, without moving from the state of awareness.
If the perception of appearance and existence, environment and beings, as real is not destroyed,
consider that the circling rays of light emanating from the maṇḍala purify the environment
and beings, which then dissolve into you.
Until deity, appearance and dharmatā all merge into one, plant the dagger that holds firm the
crucial point of samādhi.
The generation phase that involves clinging to the ego, and recollecting purity, and the clarity
that comes from contrived appearances cannot bring the result of union.
When the clarity aspect of basic space dawns as the deity, this completes the vast accumulation
of merit. And by purifying any clinging to the deity as real, the accumulation of wisdom
is perfected too. Samaya!
4. Concealed Instruction on the Result
The concealed instruction on how to gain the result at that time is as follows.
The following are special points in accordance with the tantras concerning how to obtain the
vidyādhara stages of wisdom while remaining in an ordinary body.
Invoking the master, putting effort into practices of accumulation and purification, and being
moved continually by feelings of devotion, when the maṇḍala of empowerment is complete,
and one sees primordial wisdom, that is the first stage.
Without degeneration of samaya, knowing the deities of the maṇḍala to be oneself, the second
stage is reached.
Holding the mind on the chief deity of the maṇḍala is the third stage.
When the vidyādhara can hold the mind on the maṇḍala as a whole that is the fourth stage.
Up to this point constitutes the experience of attainment.
In samādhi, there will be enthusiastic joy, increasing and diminishing, and gradual attainment
of stability.
All these stages are included, in a hidden way, within the level of a fully matured vidyādhara.
(Although this explanation of the stages and so on does not match in every detail that
given in the Magical Illusion, the basic points are the same, and so, since this is an unerring
explanation, one should accept the intention of the pith instructions.)
When holding the mind clearly on the circle of the maṇḍala, one reaches the fifth stage.
When gaining confidence in prāṇa-mind, held with the view, and the circles of the support and
supported appear distinctly and with total clarity, even down to the subtlemost particle,
and the whites and blacks of the eyes—this is the sixth stage, Clearly Manifest.
When no matter what is perceived—outer or inner, environments or inhabitants—the mind is held,
with prāṇa and mind indivisible, and time is spent in the vajra recitation, that is the
seventh stage, Far Progressed.
Up to this point, one practises the five actions of Samantabhadra, observing conduct that is
free from any negative deeds, in a pure place, a hermitage or somewhere isolated, in a pure
place, a hermitage or somewhere isolated, with pure livelihood, and food that accords with
the Dharma, pure friends, lamas and those who follow the brahmacarya, pure vows—those
of the pratimokṣa, Bodhisattvas, and vidyādharas—unstained by any faults, and the pure Dharma,
of the two phases of generation and completion. This is mainly a training in the path
of deity yoga (i.e., generation phase).
From this point onwards, the remaining stages are reached by means of the supreme path of anuyoga,
as in the mother tantra, the Wishing Jewel of the Aural Lineage.
Nevertheless, this is how one progresses through the paths and the five experiences: As a sign
of intense familiarity with generation phase practice, there will no longer be any division
between distraction and non-distraction, and one will be freed from the extremes of meditation
and post-meditation. When gaining confidence in birth and death, that is the level
of the vidyādhara with power over life and the eighth stage, the Immovable.
Then, as a sign of stable familiarity, there is no longer any feeling of pain in the body, one
gains the power of prophetic speech and knows phenomena, various types of clairvoyance
arise in the mind, ḍākinīs and sugatas issue prophecies, and enemies and obstacle-makers are
subjugated through truth—this marks the ninth and tenth stages, and the level of the mahāmudrā
vidyādhara.
Then, one reaches the final stage of Universal Radiance, the time of great infinite purity,
the spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara, and the magical manifestation of appearances arises
as the five colours. The body is purified and becomes the wisdom body of clear light;
conceptual thoughts are eliminated at their root; and there is dharmakāya rigpa, beyond any
possible change. The view of self is destroyed at its seed; the two forms of clear knowledge
arise; the harm of birth and death is eliminated; and there is no further suffering.
The five kāyas, the spontaneously perfect and precious sphere, the appearances of the great
saṃbhogakāya, arise. Samaya!
There are many profound generation and completion phase practices. Still, these are the crucial
points of the path and descriptions of the stages. If you lack this essential pith instruction,
these powerful methods based on the hidden meaning, the very heart and quintessence
of the tantras, then even though you might exert yourself meditating on the generation
phase through conceptual imputation, this will only suppress your clinging and attachment
temporarily, or else you will fall into the trap of becoming a demon or rudra. When you attain
the state of ‘union’ in name only, the sign will be that in your own imagination you
will think that you have accomplished the wisdom deity; as a deceptive trick of the māra
of sensual desires, you will believe that you have reached the level of a vidyādhara.

At the time of the degeneration of the mantra teachings, this was written by Rangjung Dorje
Jigme Lingpa. May it bring benefit to all who come into contact with it!
Samaya! Gya! Gya! Gya! Guhya! Signs are fading.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey based on the oral explanation of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche and with
the assistance of Gyurme Avertin, 2007. Edited for Lotsawa House as part of the Longchen Nyingtik
Project, 2020.
↑ There is some disagreement as to the spelling and precise meaning of the title. While some
editions have mig tshag, the latest Shechen edition of the Rinchen Terdzö prefers mig tshags.
Mig tshag can refer to an eye disorder, but may also mean a cure for impaired vision
or a protective veil for the eyes. Mig tshags may signify an eyelet or lattice-like arrangement.
Zenkar Rinpoche explains that the manual of concealed instructions (gab byang) could
be understood as a protection against the dazzling brilliance of the unveiled instruction.
Another possible interpretation of the phrase is that it signifies something worthy of
attention, a sight to behold.↑ oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ