A Prayer Invoking the Benefits of the Festival of the Tenth Day
by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa

Second Buddha, supreme master, ceaselessly I bow in homage and take refuge in you!

kalzang dir jön sangye tong tsa kün
The thousand buddhas who come to our world in this Fortunate Age
pang tok nyam shying dro la tuk tsé yang
All are equal in renunciation and realization, and they care for beings with compassion and
with love.
gang ri trö dir khyö dang tsungpa yi
Yet here in this land ringed by mountains, it is your kindness
kadrin jö du mé par sam kyin dé
That goes beyond all words or description; and the more I think of it, the deeper my faith and
devotion grow.

khawachen dir lak na pemo yi
This snow-land of Tibet was predicted by all the buddhas
duljar gyalwé lungten dzepé dön
As the realm that Avalokiteśvara would tame,
mé wön sum dang orgyen chenpo yi
Which in truth is nothing other than what has been done
dzepé namtar lé shyen mik su mé
By Songtsen Gampo, Tri Songdetsen, Ralpachen, and you, the Great Guru of Orgyen.

guru nga gom nga drub nga jé nyok
“Meditate on me, the Guru; accomplish me; follow me.
nga tong sangye kün tong nganyi ni
For seeing me is seeing all the buddhas,
deshek düpé ngowo nyi yinpé
And because I am the very essence of all the sugatas,
tsé chu jung ré bö du jön shyé sung
On every tenth day I shall come to Tibet.”
dechir namtar drenpé solwa deb
So you say and so, remembering your life-story, we pray!

horda drukpé tsé chü nyishar la
At sunrise on the tenth day of the sixth month,
dhanakosha pemé bub la jön
On Lake Dhanakośa you appear, in the heart of a lotus blossom.
gyal dar indrabhodhé chendrang té
In the twelfth month, Indrabhūti invites you,
gyalbur ngasol dorjé lam chok nyé
And, enthroned as crown prince, you practise the supreme vajra path.
chu dar gyalsi pang né sil tsal du
In the first month, you renounce the kingdom and in the Chilly Grove
tulshyuk chöpé khandro wang du dü
You practise yogic discipline, and magnetize the ḍākinīs.
wo dar ten la rimshyin triwé lé
In the second month, to lead others through the gradual stages of the teaching,
lobpön prabhahastir rabtu jung
You take ordination with acharya Prabhāhasti.
nak dar zahor gyalpö sön sek tsé
In the third month when the king of Zahor seeks to burn you alive,
mé yang chur gyur sum tsen lha yi tö
You transform the flames into water, and are praised by the gods of the three heavens.
sa dar orgyen gyalpö yabyum nyi
In the fourth month, when the king of Oḍḍiyāna burns you together with Mandāravā,
lhenchik mér sek lok sechen dak kyang
You render even those who delight in evil
rangwang mepar depé né la kö
Powerless, and inspire them with complete faith in you.
nön dar lhochok tar kyé gyalkham su
In the fifth month, in the kingdom of the far south,
ten la khuwé mutek tok gi dral
With thunderbolts you liberate the tīrthikas hostile to the teachings.
droshyin dawar takhob zangling du
In the seventh month, in the Zangling border lands
mutek gyalpö zang chen khajor nang
When the king of the tīrthikas seals you in a copper pot,
chuk né chulung kyur kyang dzutrul gyi
And casts you into the river, in a miraculous display
namkhar shekpé möla chulung yang
You instantly soar up into the sky and reverse the river’s flow,
gyen dok dik chö gyalpö né jik la
Which all but destroys the malicious king’s entire palace.
nyewé pakong zösol kyab su ten
Terrified, he begs forgiveness and takes refuge in you.
trum dar mutek ngenpé zé duk gi
In the eighth month, malevolent tīrthikas scheme to kill you
trongpar sem kyang nöpamé kyi teng
With poisoned food, yet not only are you unharmed,
zidang lhakpar gyepé ngang tsul ten
But your appearance and your whole being shine in ever growing splendour.
takar da la yangleshö du peb
In the ninth month, when you arrive in Yangleshö,
bal bö nyiké lha dré to tsam kyang
The gods and spirits of Nepal and Tibet challenge and attack you.
dorjé shyönnü kur shyeng dam la shyak
Arising in the form of Vajrakumāra, you make them swear allegiance.
mindruk dawar böyul ü su jön
In the tenth month, you arrive in central Tibet,
hepo ri tser lhasin dam la shyak
And on the peak of Mt. Hepori, you bind gods and spirits under oath.
gyalten bö du darwa khyö chikpü
The teachings of Buddha spread in Tibet because of your kindness alone, not of others,
drin la shyen dring mi jok sam kyin dé
And the more I think of this, the deeper my faith and devotion grow.
go dar sin yul shekpa la gong né
In the eleventh month, when you decide to leave for the land of the rākṣasas,
chimpur yönchö ka drö böyul kün
At Chimphu you confer with the disciples, and prepare
ter gyi tampé tagön dang drelwar
To fill the whole land of Tibet with termas,
shyidak wangdü ter gyi nyer jang té
Magnetizing the lords of the earth, and entrusting them with the treasures.

dechir jung ngo chok gi tsé chu nam
This is why each tenth day, when it comes,
khyö kyi dzepa trinlé dü chen dang
Is a festival that celebrates your enlightened actions,
ma dang khandro duwé kab yinpé
The time when mamos and khandros assemble,
nang du dorjé lü la tsa tik lung
When the channels, essence and winds in the vajra body
duwa ngotsar chen gyi tendrel lé
Gather, and through this wonderful tendrel
nam shyi trinlé kün la wangjor shying
The four kinds of activity all are mastered,
charchu beb shing mi chukné rim shyi
Rain will fall on time, and epidemics in animals and humans cured.
sé ser ulpong mak truk gökha sok
Frost, hail, poverty, violent conflict, loss and ruin and the like,
jikten dü kyi güpa jinyé kün
All over this world whatever the degenerations of this age may be—
tsé chü dü chö zung né soldeb na
Let them all be eliminated by our maintaining the practice of the tenth day, and through the
blessing of this prayer alone.
jinlab khoné shyiwa ngönsum chir
And so that we can witness this, before our very eyes,
shyalshyé dü la babpo tukjé zik
Now is the time to keep your promise: look on us with your compassion!
bö bang sam yö tamché khyö la dé
Among the people of Tibet, when the intelligent all have faith in you,
sammé drinchen pama dak la yang
But the heartless despise even their own kind parents,
khuwar jé na khyé kyi tukjé la
Let your compassion be impartial, we implore you.
nyering ma chi tukdam gyü kul lo
You swore never to neglect or abandon the people of Tibet—
bö bang namyang yalwar mi dorwé
Now is the time to honour your promise:
shyalshyé dü la babpo tukjé zik
Look on us with your compassion,
samdön yishyin drubpar jingyi lob
Grant your blessing so that all our aspirations are fulfilled, just as we desire!

At the request of the renunciate of Samyé, whose name begins with the first vowel “A”, Rigdzin
Jigme Lingpa composed this.

| Rigpa Translations, 2013