A Practice of Fulfilment and Confession to an Ocean of Oath-bound Protectors
by Rigdzin Jikmé Lingpa

om, yeshe lé drub ngönshé dzutrul chen
Oṃ! Wisdom protectors and those who carry out activity, you who are clairvoyant and possess
magical powers,
leknyé tangdzin damtsik jechö ching
Who judge good and bad and assess whether our sacred samaya pledges have been kept,1
ka shyin jesu drubpé drok dzepa
You are like an ally who acts according to the commands,2
damchen gyatsö tsok nam gong su sol
Ocean of oath-bound ones, please think of us with your wisdom mind!

dak ni naljor ngakchang drubpapö
Although I, a yogi, mantra holder and practitioner,
sang ngak dorjé chok tu dam lang té
Pledged to keep the vows of the supreme vajra vehicle of secret mantra
ku sung tuk su drubpar damché kyang
And although I vowed to accomplish the enlightened body, speech and mind,
marik wang gi detar ngo matok
I have come under the sway of ignorance and so have failed to do so.
galtrul nyamchak tamché tol lo shak
I openly admit and confess all my transgressions, confusions, impairments and breakages!

lü dang ngak yi nyönmong wanggyurpé
Since my body, speech and mind have fallen under the power of emotions,
migé dik nam gyi dang gyi tsalwa
I have committed unwholesome, negative acts, encouraged others to do so,
shyen gyi gyi la jesu yirangwa
And rejoiced in others committing them.
tamché malü dü dir tol lo shak
All this, without exception, I confess here and now!

chöku khanyam trö dang dralwa la
While the dharmakāya, the body of reality, is free from any conceptual elaboration, like the
sky,
namtok tsenmé nga dang dak tu zung
Misled by thoughts and concepts, I have grasped at ideas of 'I' and 'self'.
ta gom masal tingdzin dön lé yel
As my view and meditation lack clarity, I have strayed from genuine samādhi.
chönyi dön dang galwa tol lo shak
I openly admit and confess going against the nature of reality!

nyintsen küntu drubpar damché kyang
Although I vowed to practise day and night,
gompa yün tung dé drang nyungwa dang
I only meditate briefly and recite few mantras.
nyendrub yel shying choga lhakché gyur
I have been careless about practising the phases of approach and accomplishment, and to the
rituals I have made additions of my own and omitted what is essential,
chötor sham nyé jor drol leta lok
I have arranged offerings and tormas incorrectly, misunderstood union and liberation and committed
crimes with immediate retribution.3
sang go chol shying ka lé depé kyön
I have been mistaken about with whom to share the secrets, and have erred by disobeying the
commands.
galtrul nyamchak tamché tol lo shak
I openly admit and confess all my transgressions, confusions, impairments and breakages!

nyam dang drok shing nyampa kangwa dang
I have kept the company of samaya-breakers, and falsely purified their transgressions,
nyam la chö shé nyam dang tsok dré dang
I have taught the Dharma to violators, and practised with them in one assembly.
nyam la midzem nyamchak shyikral gyur
As I have not avoided samaya-breakers, impairments and breakages have ruined me.
nyam drib kyön nam tamché tol lo shak
I confess all my impairments, obscurations and faults!

yün ring dü né nyen ching drubpé lha
To you, the yidam deity I have practised for so long according to the phases of approach and
accomplishment,
damchen sungmé tuk dang gal gyurpa
I confess that I have upset the oath-bound protectors,
dü su machö nyendrub matsang dang
I have failed to make offerings at the appropriate times, and have not completed the phases
of approach and accomplishment,
leta malong ngönchö lé la kul
I have directed wrathful activity towards those who have not carried out crimes with immediate
retribution,
tsangdra nyam shing ta gom madak dang
I have failed to always act with pure behaviour and have practised with tainted view and meditation,
tsedung gyünché chöpé makang dang
Have failed to be loving and affectionate and have omitted to make amends by making offerings.
kongwa madzok choga lhakché gyur
My fulfilment practice has remained incomplete, and I have made additions of my own and omitted
what is essential.
nyamchak nyetung bakmé galtrul kün
I openly admit and confess all my impairments and breakages, faults and downfalls, careless
behaviour, transgressions and confusions!
tol lo shak so jang shying dakpar dzö
Please cleanse and purify them!

lha chok nam dang jisi né kyi bar
Supreme deities, as long as you remain,
dak dang mindral sem kyi gompar dzö
Never separate from me and cause me to meditate on you!
tukjé gong la kyilkhor nyenpo zung
Think of me with compassion and uphold the all-important maṇḍala.
dak la jinlab wang dang ngödrub tsol
Bless me and grant me empowerment and accomplishment,

yeshe tongjé marik münpa sel
Reveal wisdom to me, and clear away my ignorance.
nyamnyi dzokpé dön nam sosor jé
Help me discriminate between all phenomena, which are in perfect equanimity.
yönten lhündrub ying su dak kö dé
Establish me in the space within which the enlightened qualities are spontaneously accomplished!
kha shyin mitok chökur drubpa dang
May I attain the dharmakāya that is free from thought, like the sky,
nyi shyin ösal longchö dzokpé tso
And the luminosity of the pre-eminent saṃbhogakāya, the sphere of enjoyment, like the sun.
zer shyin trulpé dro dön lhündrub ching
May I manifest as a nirmāṇakāya, like the rays of the sun, spontaneously benefiting sentient
beings!
namkhé talé gyurpé drowa kün
May all beings, as limitless as space,
trinlé nam shyi ying su drolwar shok
Be liberated in the expanse of the four enlightened activities!

Recite the hundred-syllable mantra. Virtue! Virtue! Virtue!

| Translated by Han Kop and Stefan Mang and edited by Jeremy Tattersall, 2016. With gratitude
to Tulku Rigdzin Pema Rinpoche.

Version: 1.2-20211007
↑ Tulku Rigdzin Pema explains that assess (jechö, rje gcod) here also conveys the meaning of
annihilating or liberating those who break their samayas↑ Tulku Rigdzin Pema: the commands
of the Buddha and great masters like Guru Rinpoche↑ Tulku Rigdzin Pema: such as breaking
samaya