A Prayer of Devotion, to Make the Tears Fall
by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa

emaho
Emaho!
dü sum sangye kün gyi tukjé ter
You are the treasure of all the buddhas’ compassion, past, present and future,
kham sum malü drolwé depön chok
You are our greatest guide, who liberates all three realms,
bö kham drowa yong kyi nyen chikpu
You are the one and only friend of every living being in Tibet,
kadrin tsungmé orgyen chenpo la
Your kindness is beyond compare, Orgyen Chenpo.
lü dang longchö lo nying drang sum bul
I offer you my body, my possessions, my heart and soul,
khashyé ngo kok mepar solwa deb
As I pray to you, without a trace of deceit or pretence.

khor tsé tokma mé né danté bar
From beginningless time in saṃsāra till now,
marik lé dang nyönmong wang gyur né
Dominated by ignorance, karma and destructive emotions,
kham sum gyü druk né su khyampa dak
I have wandered through the three worlds and six realms of beings,
dukngal sum gyi shyakpé chingpa lé
Bound by the ropes of the three kinds of suffering—
nyurdu tukjé drol chik guru jé
Quickly, with all your compassion, free me, O Guru, O lord.

di né zung té changchub matob bar
From this moment on, till I reach enlightenment,
kyiduk leknyé zang ngen chi jung yang
In happiness or sorrow, comfort or danger, good or bad, whatever may occur,
jetsün chenpo pema jungné khyen
Jetsün Chenpo, Lotus-born—know me, care for me!

solwa nying né debpé gangzak la
When someone prays to you with all their heart,
tukjé gyünché mepar shyalshyepé
Your compassion flows unceasing: this is your promise,
tödrol sung gi dön dré malüpa
And since your words liberate upon hearing, then grant
ngönsum mik gi dütsir tsal du sol
Us everything you have pledged, here and now, I pray, so that I may see it with my very eyes!

khyepar namshyik tsé yi dü jé tsé
Above all, when this life comes to an end,
bem rik dralwé dü la babpa na
When the moment arrives for mind and body to part,
kyechi bardo né chö dukngal trang
When I face the agony and suffering of birth, death and the bardo in between,
shintu jikpa chenpö yangsa la
Then protect me from the bardo’s horrifying abyss,
kyob té ngensong sum duma tangwar
And hold me back from the three lower realms.
rangnang namdak zangdok palri shying
Let whatever I perceive transform into your pure land, the Copper Coloured Mountain of Glory,
ku sum dewa chenpö podrang ché
And right there, in the sublime three-kāya palace of great bliss,
gönpo khyö kyi tuk dang yermé du
As I merge, Lord, one with your wisdom mind,
drenpé depön dzö chik maha guru
Lead me, Mahā Guru—be my guide.

kyabné kündü orgyen chenpo khyen
You who are all sources of refuge, Orgyen Chenpo, care for me.
sangye kündü orgyen chenpo khyen
You who are all buddhas, Orgyen Chenpo, care for me.
damchö kündü orgyen chenpo khyen
You who are all Dharma, Orgyen Chenpo, care for me.
gendün kündü orgyen chenpo khyen
You who are all the Saṅgha, Orgyen Chenpo, care for me.
tsa sum kündü orgyen chenpo khyen
You who are all gurus, devas and ḍākinīs, Orgyen Chenpo, care for me.

dani dü ngen nyikmé ta la tuk
As we reach now the end of this degenerate dark age,
damchö tsulshyin jepé long ma khom
We have no time to practise the sacred Dharma correctly.
sé ser tsa ten né yam mugé dang
When we are oppressed by frost, hail, flood and drought, by sickness, epidemic and famine,
truktsö dü kyi güpé küntu nar
By violence and the decadence and decay of our time,
jungwa gang shong nöchü tendrel chuk
When the elements are plunged into chaos, the tendrel for the planet and its inhabitants go
wrong,
bö kham semchen dukngal drakpo la
And when beings in Tibet endure the harshest of suffering,
chö tsé jetsün gurü tukjé yi
Then, with all of your compassion, Jetsün Guru,
nekab dzokden sarpé gopar ché
Immediately, fling open the door to a new kind of golden age,
tartuk ösal chökü podrang du
And ultimately, I pray, within the dharmakāya’s palace of clear light
kham sum lüchen tadak ukyung né
May all living beings of the three worlds find relief,
khorwa dong né trukpar dzé du sol
So that saṃsāra is emptied, from its very depths!
Pray with such devotion that tears cascade from your eyes.

At the crystal cave of Yarlung, when offering a limitless tsok feast, and at the urgent request
of a number of friends, below the rock Draknyak Gurchok,1 this prayer was spoken by Longchen
Namkhe Naljorpa.

| Rigpa Translations, 2013
↑ This phrase could also mean that Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa was then living in a simple tent in
a cleft in the rocks.