Adornment of Lord Nāgārjuna’s Wisdom Mind
The Fourfold Maṇḍala Offering to Tārā
by Jigme Lingpa

Your name and lotus insignia
Arise as a sweet song to the ears:
I pay homage to you, Tārā, sole and certain dispeller
Of the misfortunes of the eight dangers.
The Fourfold Maṇḍala Offering to Tārā pacifies every adversity including the eight or sixteen
great dangers. This ritual consists of three sections: the preparation, main practice, and
conclusion.
The Preparation
The place where you perform this ritual, such as a temple or monastery, should be clean and
pleasing. In general, it should contain the three representations of enlightened body, speech,
and mind. Specifically, place a consecrated image of noble Tārā as the centerpiece. Position
four maṇḍalas at each of the image’s four corners and arrange one set of the five
offerings of daily use on each of the image’s four sides (front, back, left, and right). Place
wherever you like four round white tormas, adorned with the three white and three sweet
foods. Moreover, gather other necessary items close by, including those used for cleansing
rituals, such as a full vase and the substances used to refresh the offerings during each
repeated section of maṇḍala offering and approaching the deity.
The Main Practice
The main practice has two parts: cultivating stores of goodness and wisdom by relying on the
three jewels in general, and cultivating stores of goodness and wisdom by relying on noble
Tārā in particular.
Part One: Relying on the Three Jewels
This has twelve parts: 1) taking refuge and uplifting your mind to awakening, 2) taking the
vow of awakened heroes, 3) consecrating the place, 4) consecrating the offerings, 5) remembering
the qualities of the three jewels, 6) inviting the deities, 7) requesting the deities
to remain, 8) performing the cleansing ritual, 9) making offerings, 10) rendering praise,
11) presenting an extensive maṇḍala offering, and 12) stating your wishes.1
1. Taking Refuge and Uplifting Your Mind to Awakening
Wash yourself and keep clean. Then take refuge and uplift your mind to awakening with:
sangye chö dang tsok gyi chok nam la
Until reaching awakening,
changchub bardu dak ni kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Buddha, the teachings, and the sublime assembly.
dak gi jin sok gyipé sönam kyi
Fueled by the goodness of generosity and the other transcendent perfections,
dro la pen chir sangye drubpar shok
May I attain enlightenment for the sake of all beings!
Repeat this four-line verse three times.
2. Taking the Vow of Awakened Heroes
semchen tamché dewa dang dewé gyu dang trepar gyur chik
May all beings have happiness and the causes of happiness.
dukngal dang dukngal gyi gyu dang dralwar gyur chik
May all beings be free from suffering and the causes of suffering.
dukngal mepé dewa dang mindral bar gyur chik
May all beings never part from true happiness without a trace of suffering.
nyering chakdang nyi dang dralwé tang nyom tsemepa la nepar gyur chik
May all beings live in equanimity, free from attachment to dear ones and aversion to enemies.
Repeat this three times, meditating on these four boundless wishes. Then recite:
changchub nyingpor chi kyi bar
Until reaching the very heart of enlightenment,
sangye nam la kyab su chi
I take refuge in the buddhas.
chö dang changchub sempa yi
I take refuge in the teachings,
tsok la ang deshyin kyab su chi
And likewise, in the assembly of awakened heroes.
Repeat this three times. Having taken refuge, recite:
jitar ngön gyi deshek kyi
The buddhas of the past
changchub tuk ni kyepa dang
Uplifted their minds to awakening,
changchub sempé labpa la
And followed the stages of training
dedak rimshyin nepa tar
As awakened heroes.

dak kyang dro la pen döndu
As they did, I will uplift my mind to awakening
changchub sem ni kyé gyi shying
For the sake of the welfare of others.
deshyindu ni labpa la ang
As they did, I will follow the stages of training
rimpa shyindu labpar gyi
As an awakened hero.
Repeat this three times.
dengdü dak tsé drebu yö
Today my life is fruitful:
mi yi sipa lekpar tob
I’ve gained an excellent human rebirth,
dering sangye rik su kyé
Am now born into the clan of enlightenment,
sangye sé su dak deng gyur
And have become the buddha’s holy child.

dak gi dering kyobpa tamché kyi
Today, in the presence of all who grant refuge,
chen ngar drowa deshek nyi dang ni
I invite all beings to enjoy happiness
bardu dé la drön duwö zin gyi
Until they reach enlightenment.
lha dang lhamin lasok gawar gyi
May the gods, demi-gods, and all beings rejoice!
In that way, meditate joyfully.
3. Consecrating the Place
tamché du yang sa shyi dak
May the ground be pure everywhere:
sekma lasok mepa dang
Free from gravel and other sharp objects,
laktil tar nyam baiduryé
Level like the palm of the hand,
rangshyin jampor né gyur chik
Smooth and wrought from beryl.
4. Consecratng the Offerings
om hung tram hrih Ah
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ
lhadzé dang ting ngé dzin lé drubpé chi nang sangwé chötrin ngowo yeshe kyi dütsi la nampa döyön
gyi trinpung zé mishepa kuntuzangpö chöpé namrol du gyepar gyur chik
Divine substances and meditative states produce clouds of outer, inner, and secret offerings.
Their essence, wisdom nectar, appears as cloudbanks of all sense pleasures without end.
May these multiply to become the display of Awakened Hero Ever-Excellent's offerings!2
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta ah hung
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda āḥ hūṃ
If you wish, you may also recite “the clouds of offering mantra”:
namo ratna trayaya | om namo bhagavaté benza sarapramardani tatagataya arhaté samyak sambuddhaya
teyata | om benzé benzé maha benzé maha tédzo benzé maha vidya benzé maha bodhichitta
benzé maha bodhi mandopasamkramana benzé sarva karma avarana bishodhana benzé soha
namo ratna-trayāya | oṃ namo bhagavate vajrasārapramardane tathāgatāyārhate samyaksaṃbuddhāya
tadyathā | oṃ vajra vajra mahāvajra mahātejavajra mahāvidyāvajra mahābodhicittavajra mahābodhimaṇḍopasaṃkramaṇavajra
sarvakarmāvaraṇaviśodhanavajra svāhā
5. Remembering the Qualities of the Three Jewels
Before inviting Tārā, remember the qualities of the three jewels:
ditar sangye chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye rigpa dang shyab su
denpa
The Buddha, the transcendent conqueror advanced to the true nature, defeated enemies, and attained
complete and perfect enlightenment. He is aware and venerable.
dewar shekpa | jikten khyenpa
The Buddha advanced to bliss and knows the world.
kyebu dulwé khalo gyurwa | lanamepa
He is the leader of all beings to be guided and is unsurpassable.
lha dang mi nam kyi tönpa sangye chomdendé té deshyin shekpa dé ni sönam dak gi gyutünpa
The enlightened one, the transcendent conqueror, is the superlative teacher of gods and humans.
The Buddha and all things benevolent have the same basis.
gewé tsawa nam chü mi zawa
He is the inexhaustible source of all ennobling qualities.
zöpé rabtu gyenpa
He is fully ornamented with forbearance.
sönam kyi ter nam kyi shyi
He is the foundation of all treasure troves of goodness.
pejé zangpo nam kyi trepa
The eighty excellent signs of physical perfection adorn him,
tsen nam kyi metok gyepa
As does the blossoming flower of the thirty-two signs of physical perfection.
chöyul renpar tünpa
The Buddha’s every act is fitting.
tong na mitünpa mepa
When you see him, nothing is disagreeable.
depé möpa nam la ngönpar gawa
He brings tangible joy to those endowed with respect and devotion.
sherab zil gyi mi nönpa
His sublime insight cannot be overcome.
tob nam la dziwa mepa
His might cannot be suppressed.
semchen tamché kyi tönpa
The Buddha is the teacher of all beings,
changchub sempa nam kyi yab
The father of awakened heroes,
pakpé gangzak nam kyi gyalpo
The sovereign among exalted individuals,
nya ngen lé depé drongkhyer du drowa nam kyi depön
And the leader of everyone to the citadel of the transcendence of misery.
yeshe pak tu mepa
His wisdom is immeasurable;
pobpa sam gyi mi khyabpa
His confidence, inconceivable.
sung nampar dakpa
His speech is pure;
yang nyenpa
His voice, melodious.
ku jé tawé chok mishepa
His face is irresistibly beautiful.
ku tsungpa mepa
His physical form is incomparable.
döpa dak gi magöpa | zuk dak gi nyewar göpa
He is not a desire or form realm being,
zukmé pa dak dang madrepa
And he’s distinct from the formless realm.
dukngal dak lé nampar drolwa
He is completely free of suffering.
pungpo dak lerab tu nampar drolwa kham nam dang mi denpa
He liberated his aggregates, unburdened himself of the sense elements,
kyemché nam dampa
And restrained his sense bases.
düpa nam shintu chepa
The Buddha has cut every knot.
yongsu dungwa dak lé nampar drolwa
Entirely liberated from yearning of any sort,
sipa lé drolwa
He's free from existence.
chuwo lé galwa
He has crossed the river.
yeshe yongsu dzokpa
The Buddha’s wisdom is wholly complete.
depa dang majönpa dang dantar jungwé sangye chomdendé nam kyi yeshe la nepa
The Buddha abides in the wisdom of all enlightened transcendent conquerors throughout past,
present, and future.
nya ngen lé depa la mi nepa
He doesn't dwell suspended in the transcendence of misery.
yangdakpa nyi kyi ta la nepa
He is correct.
semchen tamché la zikpé sa la shyukpa té
He has entered the state in which he sees all beings.
didak ni sangye chomdendé nam kyi chewé yönten yangdakpa nam so
These constitute the true, supreme qualities of the buddhas, enlightened transcendent conquerors.

dampé chö ni tokmar gewa | bardu gewa | tamar gewa
The sacred teachings are noble at the start, the middle, and the end.
dön zangpo | tsikdru zangpo | madrepa
Their meanings are excellent, their words superlative and entirely precise.
yongsu dzokpa | yongsu dakpa | yongsu jangwa
The teachings are utterly complete, pure, and distilled.
chomdendé kyi chö lekpar sungpa
The enlightened transcendent conqueror eloquently expresses the teachings.
yangdakpa tongwa | né mepa | dü chepa mepa
The teachings view reality correctly, are uncompromised by weakness, and have timeless continuity.
nyewar töpa
They are highly acclaimed.
di tongwa ladön yöpa
To see the teachings is significant.
khepa nam kyi soso rang gi rigpar jawa
The wise discern the teachings through their individual direct awareness.
chomdendé kyi sungpé chö dulwa la lekpar tenpa
Teachings presented by the transcendent conqueror are firmly grounded in ethical discipline.
ngepar jungwa | dzokpé changchub tu drowar jepa
These teachings foster renunciation, propelling beings to complete awakening.
mitünpa mé ching düpa dang denpa
The meaning and words of the teachings are always in accord. The compilations of the teachings
are complete, with nothing left out.
tenpa yöpa gyuwa chepa o
They are trustworthy and put an end to wandering.

tekpa chenpö gendün ni lekpar shyukpa
The spiritual community has entered the greater approach in an excellent manner,
rigpar shyukpa drangpor shyukpa tünpar shyukpa
With understanding, honesty, and harmony.
talmo jarwé ö su gyurpa chak jawé ö su gyurpa
The community is worthy of homage and veneration.
sönam kyi pal gyi shying
It is the field for cultivating stores of glorious goodness.
yön yongsu jangwa chenpo
Offerings given to the spiritual community
jinpé né su gyurpa
Are entirely pure.
küntu yang jinpé né su gyurpa chenpo o
It is the foremost recipient of gifts and every form of support.
6. Inviting the Deities
malü semchen kün gyi gön gyur ching
Lord protector of all beings, neglecting none,
dü dé pung ché mi zé jomdzé lha
You relentlessly vanquished the hordes of demons.
ngö nam malü jishyin khyen gyurpé
Transcendent conqueror, knower of all reality just as it is,
chomden khor ché né dir shek su sol
Come here with your entire retinue, I pray.

chomden kalpa drangmé duma ru
Transcendent conqueror, for many countless eons
dro la tsé chir tukjé nam gong shing
You have loved all beings and thought of those worthy of compassion.
mönlam gyachen gongpa yongdzokpé
Now is the time to fulfill your sweeping aspirations
khyö shyé dro dön dzé dü di lak na
By helping others as you always intended.

dechir chöying podrang lhündrub né
I beseech you to come here with your entire retinue
dzutrul jinlab natsok tön dzé ching
From the ever-present palace of space.
tayé semchen tsok nam dralwé chir
Display myriad miracles and benedictions
yangdak khor dangché té shek su sol
In order to liberate infinite numbers of beings.
benza samadza
vajra-samaya
Perform grand music.
7. Requesting the Deities to Remain
chomden dir jönpa lek
Transcendent conqueror, welcome—
dakchak sönam kalwar den
We’re so lucky you’ve come here!
dak gi chöyön shyé ledu
We beseech you to remain in this place
di nyi du ni shyuk su sol
To receive our gifts and offerings.
pema kamala ye tam
padma kamalāyas tvaṃ
Offer them a seat.
8. Performing the Cleansing Ritual
trü kyi khangpa shintu drishyimpa
This bathhouse is suffused with sweet aromas.
shel gyi sa shyi sal shying tserwa tar
Its crystal floor boasts a brilliant sheen,
rinchen barwé kawa yi ongden
On which stand rows of attractive jeweled columns
mutik ö chak laré drepa der
And a dazzling pearl canopy.

deshyin shekpa nam dang dé sé la
Accompanied by songs and music,
rinchen bumpa mangpo pö kyi chu
I take many jeweled vases
yi ong lekpar kangwa lu dang ni
Filled with pleasing, scented water to bathe the bodies
rolmor chepa dumé kutrü sol
Of those advanced to the true nature, with their heirs.

dedak ku la tsungpa mepé gö
I dry their bodies with incomparable cloth,
tsang la dri rab göpé ku chi o
Clean and deeply scented.
dené dé lakha dok lek gyurwé
I offer them the finest robes,
naza shintu drishyim dampa bul
Well-dyed and exquisitely fragrant.

gö zang sab la jampa natsok dang
I take myriad fine garments, delicate and soft,
gyen chok gyatrak dé dang dedak gi
And hundreds of exceptional ornaments
pakpa kuntuzang dang jamyang dang
To adorn exalted awakened heroes,
jikten wangchuk sok la ang gyenpar gyi
Such as Ever-Excellent, Gentle Melody, and Lord of the World.3

tongsum küntu dringé dangwa yi
Like polishing refined pure gold,
dri chok nam kyi tubwang kün gyi ku
I anoint the radiant bodies of all buddhas
ser jang tsoma jidor jepa tar
With the best of fragrances,
ö chak barwa dedak jukpar gyi
Whose scents pervade the cosmos.
In relation to the words you just recited, offer divine clothes and fragrant ointments.4
9. Making Offerings
Recite the seven-part service found in The Flower Ornament Sutra.
jinyé su dak chok chü jikten na
All transcendent buddhas—lions among humanity—
dü sum shekpa mi yi sengé kün
Of the past, present, and future
dak gi malü dedak tamché la
In as many worlds as there are in the ten directions:
lü dang ngak yi dangwé chak gyi o
To each and every one of you I pay homage with awe in thought, word, and deed.

zangpo chöpé mönlam tob dak gi
All triumphant buddhas rise vividly to mind
gyalwa tamché yi kyi ngönsum du
Through the force of my aspirations to live with my best heart forward.
shying gi dul nyé lü rab tüpa yi
I replicate my body in numbers equal to the atoms in this realm
gyalwa kün la rabtu chaktsal lo
To bow to you all in utmost deference.

dul chik teng na dul nyé sangye nam
On each atom dwell as many buddhas as there are atoms,
sangye sé kyi ü na shyukpa dak
Each buddha in the midst of their spiritual children.
detar chö kyi ying nam malüpa
I imagine such triumphant buddhas filling the entirety
tamché gyalwa dak gi gangwar mö
Of the infinite womb of all things.

dedak ngakpa mizé gyatso nam
With endless oceans of hymns
yang kyi yenlak gyatsö dra kün gyi
In seas of melodious tones in all tongues,
gyalwa kün gyi yönten rab jö ching
I give full voice to the qualities of all victors
dewar shekpa tamché dak gi tö
As I acclaim you, joyful buddhas.

metok dampa trengwa dampa dang
Holy flowers, holy garlands,
silnyen nam dang jukpa duk chok dang
Music, balms, the finest parasols,
marmé chok dang dukpö dampa yi
The best lamps, and sacred incense—
gyalwa dedak la ni chöpar gyi
All these I offer to you, triumphant ones.

naza dampa nam dang dri chok dang
Holy clothing, the finest perfumes, and medicinal powders
chema purma rirab nyampa dang
Piled as tall as the highest mountain—
köpa khyepar pakpé chok kün gyi
All these in special exquisite arrays
gyalwa dedak la ni chöpar gyi
I offer to you, triumphant buddhas.

chöpa gang nam lamé gya chewa
With the force of faith in life lived with my best heart forward
dedak gyalwa tamché la yang mö
And with my devotion toward all victors,
zangpo chö la depé tob dak gi
I take these gifts, vast and unsurpassed,
gyalwa kün la chaktsal chöpar gyi
And present homage and offerings to all triumphant buddhas.

döchak shyedang timuk wang gi ni
I divulge and admit
lü dang ngak dang deshyin yi kyi kyang
Each and every wrongdoing
dikpa dak gi gyipa chi chipa
I did in thought, word, and deed
dedak tamché dak gi sosor shak
While engrossed in desire, anger, and stupidity.

chok chü gyalwa kün dang sangye sé
I rejoice in every goodness of all triumphant buddhas in the ten directions,
ranggyal nam dang lob dang mi lob dang
The goodness of their spiritual children and of solitary sages,
drowa kün gyi sönam gangla yang
The goodness of those on paths of training or the path of no further training,
dedak kün gyi jesu dak yi rang
And the goodness of all beings.

gang nam chok chü jikten drönma nam
Lights of every world in the ten directions who awakened,
changchub rimpar sangye machak nyé
Then gradually gained enlightenment free from attachment—
gönpo dedak dak gi tamché la
Lord defenders of beings—
khorlo lanamepar korwar kul
I ask you to set in motion the wheel of the highest doctrine.

nya ngen da tön gang shyé dedak la
Those of you who weigh
drowa kün la pen shying dewé chir
Whether to show us how to pass beyond sorrow,
kalpa shying gi dul nyé shyukpar yang
I beg you with folded hands, to stay alive for the good and the joy of all
dak gi talmo rab jar solwar gyi
During as many eons as there are atoms in this realm.

chaktsalwa dang chö ching shakpa dang
Whatever slight store of ennobling acts
jesu yi rang kul shying solwa yi
I have collected by this homage,
gewa chungzé dak gi chi sakpa
Offering, admission, rejoicing, request, and supplication,
tamché dak gi changchub chir ngo o
I dedicate it all to awakening.
If wish you may recite the following:
tubwang chöné chok la yi ongwé
To you, powerful sages, supreme recipient of offerings,
metok mendara dang pema dang
I offer entrancing flowers of every delicious scent—
utpal lasok drishyim tamché dang
Lily, lotus, blue lotus, and others—
trengwa pel lek yi ong nam kyi chö
Strung into magnificent garlands, the most attractive offering.

pö chok yitrok dringé khyabpa yi
Aromas waft from the finest, captivating incense,
dukpé trin tsok nam kyang dé la ngul
Diffusing into billowing clouds of incense I offer.
shyalzé zatung natsok chepa yi
I present various foods and drinks—
lhashö nam kyang dé la ulwar gyi
Divine ambrosia.

ser gyi pema tsar dü ngarwa yi
I offer jeweled vessels
rinchen drönma nam kyang ulwar gyi
Filled with row upon row of golden lotus flowers.
sa shyi tarwa pö kyi jukpa der
Fresh fruit and beautiful flowers
metok yi ong silma drampar ja
Are spread across the level ground, anointed with perfume.

shyalmé podrang tö yang yi ongden
Compelling songs and praises resound in a celestial palace,
mutik rinchen gyen chang dzé barwa
Beautifully decorated with strands of pearls and jewels.
pakyé namkhé gyen gyur dedak kyang
I offer these ornaments of infinite space
tukjé rangshyin chen la ulwar gyi
To you whose very nature is compassion.

rinchen duk dzé ser gyi yuwachen
A jeweled, elegant parasol with a golden handle
khoryuk gyen gyi nampa yi ongden
Has an attractive form that adorns the horizon.
yib lek ta na dukpa drengwa yang
Aloft with a perfect shape, gorgeous to behold:
taktu tubwang nam la ulwar gyi
This I always offer to you, powerful sages.

dé lé shyenyang chöpé tsok
I present collections of offerings beyond these:
rolmo yang nyen yi ongden
Music in sweet, captivating melodies
semchen dukngal tsim jepé
That alleviates beings’ sufferings—
trin nam sosor né gyur chik
May clouds of each offering remain.

damchö könchok tamché dang
May rains of gems, flowers, and other offerings
chörten nam dang kuzuk la
Descend continually upon the sacred doctrine
rinchen metok lasok char
And all its jewels,
gyün mi chepar babpar shok
And on stūpas and sacred images.

jitar jamyang lasokpé
Just as Gentle Melody and other bodhisattvas
gyalwa nam la chö dzepa
Presented offerings to the victors,
detar dak gi deshyin shek
I make these offerings to you,
gönpo sé dangché nam chö
Lord protectors advanced to the true nature, and your heirs.

yönten gyatso nam la dak
I praise your vast qualities in song
tö yang yenlak gyatsö tö
With oceans of melodies.
tö yang nyen trin dedak la
May these lilting clouds of melodious acclaim
ngepar küntu junggyur chik
Surely reach all of you.

dü sum shekpé sangye kün
All buddhas gone beyond throughout the past, present, and future;
chö dang tsok kyi chok ché la
The teachings; and sublime assembly:
shying dul kün gyi drang nyé kyi
I bow to you with bodies equal in number
lü tüpa yi dak chaktsal
To every atom in every realm.

changchub sem kyi shyi nam dang
I bow to awakened heroes—the very basis of the intention to awaken—
chörten nam la dak chaktsal
And to all stūpas,
khenpo deshyin lobpön dang
Venerating the learned masters, vajra masters,
tulshyuk chok la chaktsal lo
And those who have fully mastered fearless conduct.
10. Rendering Praise
gönpo tukjé ché denpa
Supremely compassionate lord protector,
tamché khyenpé tönpa po
You are the all-knowing teacher.
sönam yönten gyatsö shying
Field of boundless goodness and qualities,
deshyin shek la chaktsal lo
To you, the Buddha advanced to the true nature, I pay homage.

dakpa döchak dralwé gyu
The teachings are pure and bring about freedom from desire and attachment.
gewé ngensong lé drol shying
They foster ennobling qualities that liberate beings from miserable existences.
chik tu döndam chokgyur pa
In essence, they are sublime and ultimate.
shyi gyur chö la chaktsal lo
To the teachings, serenity itself, I pay homage.

drol né drolwé lam yang tön
Members of the spiritual community,
labpa dak la rabtu gü
You gained freedom and went on to show others the path to freedom.
shying gi dampa yönten den
Deeply respectful of the three forms of training,
gendün la yang chaktsal lo
To you, the true field of qualities, I pay homage.

töpar öpa tamché la
I send out bodies equal in number
shying dul kün gyi drang nyé kyi
To every atom in every realm.
lü tüpa yi namkün tu
These pay homage in every way
chok tu depé chaktsal lo
To all those worthy of praise.
If you wish, you may also recite the following:
gawa gyaden chimé drongkhyer né
The sacred awakened hero, Holy White Topknot,5
changchub sem kyi dampa tok karpo
Came from the immortal city in the Heaven of Hundreds of Joys,
shakyé rik kyi tikler dzinpé nö
To enter into the vessel of Doe Eyes, Mahāmāyā Devī,
gyutrul lhamo ridak mikchen yin
Who held the successor of the Śākya clan.

ötong shar gyi ri la chepa shyin
Like daybreak of one thousand lights over the eastern mountains,
lhum gyi ser shyepa lumbi tsal
She gave birth, a lotus fully blossomed, to you in Lumbinī grove.
tsang dang wangpö sishyü dzé jé shing
Brahma and Indra served you with reverence and made you resplendent.
changchub rik su lungten la chaktsal
It was foretold that you would join the rank of buddhas.

langtsö drekpé shakya shyönnü ü
Among the young and arrogant Śākya youths,
gyutsal drukchu tsa shyi roltsé tu
You excelled with prowess in the sixty-four skills.
kün gyi khyö la tü ching drakpa yi
As all bowed to you,
kyegü namshé mik dang nawar dzok
Your renown was established in the thoughts, eyes, and ears of all.

dö sé shyakpé shyenwang magyur shyin
The noose of desire and lust never enslaved you,
yab chik gyé lé tsünmö gyuma la
But to please your father and to protect your dominion,
gyumé tawé té né gyalpö khab
You regarded as illusory your magical queens.
kyangpé dön kün drubpa la chaktsal
For that you were named Siddhārtha, Accomplisher of Everything Meaningful: to you I pay homage.

shintu yo shying jikpa gyalsi kyi
You entirely resisted the draw of ruling the kingdom.
chakkyü wang duma gyur gamé kyang
Four events captured your attention
ngepar jungwé kyen shyi khyö kyi tuk
And led you to renunciation:
trok né rangjung gelong nyi du ten
You demonstrated the process of becoming a natural monk.

tsöndrü lab kyi mi ngal nairanya
On the banks of Nairañjanā River, your deep, unflagging perseverance
katub dungwa zöpé nyingtob dang
Allowed you to face extreme austerities with brave forbearance
küntok dulwa dzinpé samten la
And foster meditative states that tame thoughts.
chok chü deshek gyé la chaktsal lo
This delighted the buddhas everywhere: to you I pay homage

drangmé sum gyi si du namrik kün
Throughout the three countless eons of your existences,
tsok nyi tagü chingpa dön yö chir
Your discernment was entirely shaped by the cultivation of goodness and wisdom.
changchub shingdrung dü nam trak jé né
In order to fulfill your path, you walked to the tree of awakening, struck fear in the demons,
ngönpar dzoksang gyawa gyal kün shi
And attained manifest and perfect enlightenment, as all buddhas do.

khorwa ting tamepé yangsa la
With the boat of the three wheels of the doctrine,
gyukpé drowa khorlo sum gyi drü
You liberated those drowning in the bottomless and endless abyss of the round of rebirth,
dral né tarpa dang ni namkhyen gyi
Ferrying them to a state of freedom and omniscience:
gopang triwa khyö la chaktsal lo
To you I pay homage.

tok ching chö kyang dompa minpé char
In the city of Śravastī, you used magical powers
tungpé ché zir mutek tönpé ché
To silence the tongues of heretical teachers
nyamdu yöpé chotrul tü chepé
Who were drunk on their analytical prowess and lack of self-restraint.
kyeng dang ziji nyampé tsok dzok
You won the contest and left them humiliated, their prestige drained.

dzutrul kangpa shyi la chok tob khyö
You attained the summit of the four supports of miraculous ability.
kyé ga na chi tsorwa mi nyong yang
You were never susceptible to the pangs of birth, aging, sickness, and death,
ngepar parol dro di mi sem nam
Yet to inspire disillusion in those heedless of death’s certainty,
kyo lé nya ngen da tön der chaktsal
You demonstrated the transcendence of misery: to you I bow.

sönam nyamchung gyurpé drowa nam
You left behind eight portions of multiplying relics—
karpö chö rab pelwé tsong tong ni
Physical articles meant to encourage all those with meager merit
dzepa mepé ringsel cha gyé du
To greatly increase their positive qualities—
shyak té chö kyi ying su zimpa tar
And dissolved into the womb of reality.

dak kyang dzok min jang sum tarchin né
Like you, I will perfect the stages of completion, maturation, and cultivation.
kham sum lé dé womin chenpo ru
In the supreme pure land called Unsurpassable, beyond the three realms,
ngönpar sangye trulpé dzepa chü
I will attain manifest enlightenment, and through the ten deeds of the manifest body of enlightenment,
künkhyen khyé dang dro dön nyampar shok
May I equal you, omniscient one, in serving beings!
11. Presenting an Extensive Maṇḍala Offering
om benza bhumi ah hung
oṃ vajrabhūmi āḥ hūṃ
shyi yongsu dakpa wangchen ser gyi sa shyi
This foundation is the entirely pure mighty golden ground.
om benza rekhé ah hung
oṃ vajrarekhe āḥ hūṃ
chi chakri khoryuk gi korwé ü su hung
I offer the bordering iron mountains that encircle the central hūṃ;
ri gyalpo rirab
Mount Meru, sovereign among mountains, standing in the center;
shar lüpakpo
In the east, the continent Noble Body;
lho dzambuling
In the South, the continent Rose Apple;
nub balangchö
In the West, the continent Wish-fulfilling Cow;
jang draminyen
In the North, the continent Ominous Sound;
lü dang lüpak
Body and Excellent Body, to the East;
ngayab dang ngayab shyen
Tail Fan and Minor Tail Fan, to the South;
yoden dang lamchok dro
Tremulous and Great Destiny, to the West;
draminyen dang draminyen gyi da
And Ominous Sound and Satellite of Ominous Sound, to the North.
rinpoche riwo paksam gyi shing
I offer jewel mountain; Wish-fulfilling tree;
döjöba mamöpé lotok
Wish-granting cow; Spontaneous harvest.
khorlo rinpoche norbu rinpoche
I offer precious wheel; Priceless gem;
tsünmo rinpoche lönpo rinpoche
Esteemed queen; Valued minister;
langpo rinpoche tachok rinpoche
Cherished elephant; Treasured horse;
makpön rinpoche ter chenpö bumpa
Esteemed general; And vase of abundant treasure;
gekpama trengwama
I offer goddess of allure; Goddess of garlands;
luma garma
Goddess of song; Goddess of dance;
metokma dukpöma
Goddess of flowers; Goddess of incense;
nangsalma drichabma
Goddess of illumination; And goddess of perfume.
nyima dawa rinpoche duk
I offer the sun; The moon; Jeweled parasol;
chok lé nampar gyalwé gyaltsen
And banner of universal victory.
lha dang mi paljor pünsum tsokpa matsangwa mepa di nyi
I offer these magnificent glories and riches of gods and humans, complete and flawless,
drinchen tsawa dang gyüpar chepé palden lama dampa nam dang yidam gyalwé kyilkhor gyi lhatsok
sangye dang changchub sempé tsok dang chepa nam la bulwar gyi o
To the illustrious holy root and lineage lamas, the wisdom deities, the hosts of sacred circles
of deities, and the buddhas and assembly of awakened heroes.
tukjé drowé döndu shyé su sol
I beseech you, in your great compassion, to accept these offerings for the sake of all beings.
shyé né jingyi lab tu sol
Accepting them, grant your blessings, I pray.

sa shyi pö chü juk shing metok tram
I offer this ground, anointed with perfume and strewn with flowers,
rirab ling shyi nyidé gyenpa di
Adorned by Supreme Mountain, the four continents, and the sun and moon:
sangye shying du mik té pulwa yi
Imagining this as a buddha land,
dro kün namdak shying la chöpar shok
By virtue of this offering, may all beings enjoy this pure land.
idam ratna mandala kam nirya tayami
idam ratna maṇḍala kaṃ nirya tayāmi
12. Stating Your Wishes
pendé jungwé né chikpu
May the doctrine,
tenpa yün ring nepa dang
Sole source of benefit and happiness, long remain.
tenpa dzinpé kyebu nam
May the victory banner of the lives
kutsé gyaltsen ten gyur chik
Of those who uphold the doctrine stand firm.

drowé dukngal men chikpu
May the doctrine,
dewa tamché jungwé né
Sole panacea for beings’ pain
tenpa nyé dang kurti dang
And source of all bliss,
ché té yün ring né gyur chik
Remain rich and revered.

tsuklak nam ni lokpa dang
May all temples be well established
khatön gyi gyen lek né shing
And adorned with study and recitation.
taktu gendün tünpa dang
May the spiritual community be harmonious
gendün dön yang drubpar shok
And always accomplish what is meaningful.

chok nam kün na lü dang sem
May the sum of my goodness
dukngal nepa jinyepa
Lead anyone in any place,
dedak dak gi sönam kyi
Whose mind or body is afflicted by any form of sickness or suffering,
dé ga gyatso tobpar shok
To seas of bliss and joy.

dé ga khorwa jisi du
For as long as any beings
namyang dé lé nyam magyur
Live in the round of rebirth,
drowé changchub sempa yi
May their happiness never decline.
dewa gyün mi ché tob shok
May beings attain the ceaseless bliss of awakened heroes.

jikten kham na nyalwa dak
However many beings there are in hell
gangdak jinyé yöpa nam
In any worldly realm,
dedak tu ni lüchen nam
May they feel comfort and happiness
dechen dewé gawar shok
And become joyful.

drangwé nyamtak dro tob shok
May those stricken with cold become warm.
changchub sempé trin chen lé
May the endless streams of rain that flow
jungwé chuwo tayé kyi
From the vast clouds of awakened mind
tsawé nyamtak silwar shok
Bring soothing cool to those overcome by heat.

düdro nam ni chik la chik
May animals be free of the terror
zawé jik dang dralwar shok
Of being eaten by one another.
draminyen pé mi shyindu
May all starving spirits enjoy happiness
yidak nam ni dewar gyur
Equal to the humans who live on the continent of Ominous Sound.

longwa nam kyi mik tong shying
May the blind see.
önpé taktu dra tö shok
May the deaf always hear.
lhamo gyutrul jishyin du
May all pregnant women safely give birth
drumma ang nömé tsawar shok
Just as the Buddha’s mother Mahāmāyā Devī did.

cherbu nam kyi gö dak dang
May those who are naked find clothing.
trepa nam kyi zé dang ni
May the hungry have food.
kompa nam kyi sa chu dak dang
May those who thirst enjoy water
tungwa shyimpo tobpar shok
And delicious beverages to drink.

trenpa nam kyi nor tob shok
May the destitute gain wealth.
nya ngen nyamtak ga tob shok
May the depressed be joyful.
yiché nam kyang yi sö shing
May even pessimists find renewed hope
tenpa pünsum tsokpar shok
And gain magnificent stability.

semchen nepa jinyepa
May every sick individual
nyurdu né lé tar gyur chik
Be quickly cured of disease.
drowé né ni malüpa
May all illness, without exception,
taktu jungwa mepar shok
Never occur under any circumstance.

trakpa nam ni jikme shok
May the fearful be dauntless.
chingpa nam ni drolwar gyur
May those in bondage be free.
tumé nam ni tuden shying
May the powerless gain strength
sem ni pentsün nyen gyur chik
And wish to help others.

drönpa dak ni tamché la
May travelers experience well-being
chok nam tamché dewar shok
Wherever they go.
gang gi döndu dro jepa
May they effortlessly
dé bé mi gö drub gyur chik
Reach their journey’s end.

dru dang dru chen shyukpa nam
May those who embark on boats and planes6
yi la sampa drub gyur té
Arrive at their intended destination:
chu yi ngok su der chin né
Once they reach the far shore
nyen dang lhenchik gawar shok
Together with the pilot, may they rejoice.

nya ngen lamgol khyampa nam
May those who wander lost and anxious
drönpa dak dang tré gyur né
Meet with other travelers.
chomkün tak sok jikme par
Then, finding their way free of all threats, such as thieves, bandits, and tigers,
mi ngal delak dongwar shok
May they proceed unwearied in comfort.

gön sok lammé nyam ngawar
When defenseless, frightened children and elderly people
jipa genpo gön mepa
Travel through untracked wilderness
nyi lok nyö shing rab nyö nam
And succumb to the deep intoxication of sleep,
lha dak sungwa jepar shok
May the gods protect them.

lha yang dü su charbeb shing
May the gods send timely rains
lotok pünsum tsokpar shok
To produce glorious harvests.
gyalpo chö shyin jé gyur chik
May rulers adhere to the Buddhist doctrine
jikten dak kyang darwar shok
And may their worldly dominions flourish.

men nam tu dang denpa dang
May medicines be potent
sang ngak dejö drubpar shok
And may recitations of mantra be effective.
khandro sinpo lasokpa
May non-human worldly beings, such as ḍākinīs and ogres,
nyingjé sem dangden gyur chik
Be compassionate.

ngensong dukngal mi nyong shying
May humans, whose bodies are better than those of the gods,
kawa chepa mepar yang
Never feel the sufferings of miserable existences
lhawé lhakpé lü kyi ni
Or undergo hardship:
dedak sangye nyur tob shok
May they swiftly attain enlightenment!

changchub sempa nam kyi ni
May all awakened heroes
dro dön tuk la gong drub shok
Accomplish their intention—the welfare of beings.
gönpo yi ni gang gongpa
May all beings
semchen nam la dé jor shok ché jö
Gain everything these lord protectors intend!
Part Two: Relying on Exalted Tārā
There are three sections of maṇḍala offering and approaching the deity. The first has twelve
parts: 1) visualizing the deities, 2) inviting the deities, 3) receiving the bestowal of
empowerment, 4) sealing the union of visualized and wisdom deities with a gesture, 5) presenting
the seven-part service, 6) performing the cleansing ritual, 7) making offerings, 8)
presenting an extensive maṇḍala offering, 9) rendering praise, 10) paying homage, 11) approaching
the sacred circle with mantra recitation, and 12) making supplications.
1. Visualizing the Deities
om shunyata jnana benza sobhava atmako ham
oṃ mahā-śūnyatājñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātmako ‘ham
Realization of the transcendent nature of phenomena cultivates stores of wisdom.
Maintain an attitude of great compassion for those who lack such realization and arise as the
enlightened form of the wisdom deity, a magical illusion, and serve others. You thus cultivate
stores of goodness.
tongpé ngang lé pam lé pema dang
Within emptiness, a lotus arises from the syllable paṃ
a lé dawé dal gyi tengdu tam lé utpal tam gyi tsenpa dé lé özer trö pakpa chö
And the circle of the moon from a. Upon it stands the syllable taṃ, from which unfolds a blue
lotus marked with taṃ. Its shining light presents offerings to exalted beings
semchen gyi dön jé tsur düpa lé dün gyi ten jetsün drolma kudok janggu chudruk lönpé nampa dzé
shing
And brings all sentient beings to enlightenment. The light returns to taṃ and changes into noble
Tārā, a beautiful sixteen year-old, green in color, who sits before me.
rinpoche gyen dang darna tsok kyi shamtab chen töyok dang dar sab mö num kabpa
She wears jeweled ornaments and a multi-colored silk skirt, as well as an upper garment. Sheer
silks cover her breasts.
utra liwé yön chok gyendu dzé shing yé ngö né turdu chungzé changwa
Her hair is swept up on the left side and hangs down freely behind on the right.
chak yé chok jin dang yönpa tukkar utpalé tsawa né zungwé metok khorlö tsenpa nawé tekar lebpa
Her right hand makes the gesture of supreme generosity. In her left, she holds the stem of a
blue lotus at the level of her heart. Its flower, marked by a wheel, blossoms at her left
ear.
dawé gyab yolchen
A moon-like halo shines at her back.
dé takor du pedab chupa nyi rim la drolma shyen nyishu po shyuk tang tsomo dang drawa la kudok
dang chaktsen gyi khyepar dün né rimpé yekor du nyurma pamo mar la tro dzum chakpé nyamchen
utpalé teng na dung yekhyil dzinpa
Around her sit twenty other forms of Tārā on two concentric sets of ten lotus petals. Each Tārā
sits in a posture like the central figure, is a different color, and bears her own insignia
atop the blue lotus held in her left hand. In front sits Swift Heroine, red, wrathful
and smiling. She exudes a mood of passion. Her blue lotus holds a conch shell, its spiral
twisting to the right.
deshyindu yangchenma tön dé shyal melong hrim gyi tsenpa
Likewise, in a clockwise direction from her, sits Melodious Goddess,7 the color of the autumn
moon, with a crystal mirror marked with the syllable hrīṃ.
ser ngo sönam chok ter rinpoche
Supreme Treasure of Goodness, yellow-blue, has a jewel.
tsuktor namgyal ser dok tsebum
Victorious Topknot, yellow, has a longevity vase.
rikjema legen dok dashyu
Kurukullā, red, has a bow and arrow.
jikjé chenmo marnak purbu
Terrifying Goddess, dark red, has a dagger.
shyen gyi mi tub ma nakmo tronyer chen raldri
Invincible, black and frowning, has a sword.
shyen mi gyalwa marnak tronyer chen dorjé
Undefeated, dark red and frowning, has a vajra.
jikten sum gyal marmo gyaltsen
Conqueror of the Three Worlds, red, has a victory banner.
nor ter marmo tronyer chen ter bum
Jewel Treasure, red and frowning, has a treasure vase.
tashi dönjé ma sermo pal bé
Auspicious Accomplisher, yellow, has an endless knot.
drapung jom ma marmo dorjé ra deng
Army that Defeats Enemies, red, has a vajra with outspread prongs.
tronyer chen dzé nakmo tün shing
Wrathful Frown, black, has a wooden club.
rabtu shyiwa karsal chiluk
Utmost Pacification, bright white, has a pitcher.
barwé öchen marmo gyadram
Blazing Light, red, has a vajra cross.
pakmé nön ma ngurmik chörten
Boundlessly Overwhelming, saffron color, has a stupa.
maja chenmo karsal dawa
Peacock Goddess, bright white, has a moon.
mipam gyalmo karsal dukkar
Undefeated Victory, bright white, has a parasol.
ritrö lhamo marser zama tok
Goddess of Hermitages, orange, has a container.
özer chen ma kar mar sernya dzinpa
Light Rays, pink, has a golden fish.
tamché kyang tabab kyi kyilmo trung dang tukkar pema dang dawé dal la tam yik reré tsenpa dé
özer gyi ripo tala né jetsün drolma la sangye dang changchub sempé tsok kyi korwa benza samadza
Each Tārā sits with one leg bent inward, the other partially extended. Within her heart stands
a taṃ syllable on the circle of a lotus and moon. Taṃ radiates light, inviting the buddhas
and their retinues of assembled awakened heroes from Potalaka Mountain to the twenty-one
noble Tārās. Vajra-samaya.
After you’ve completed this part once, during subsequent repetitions start with the following
invitation that begins, “Tārā, born of a green syllable Tam…”
2. Inviting the Deities
potala yi né chok né
Tārā, born of a green syllable taṃ,
tam yik janggu lé trung shing
Buddha Boundless Light crowns you.
öpakmé pé u la gyen
Come here from the sublime land of Potala, I pray.
dü sum sangye trinlé ma
You carry out every act of the buddhas of all times—
drowé dönchir shek su sol
For the sake of beings, pray come to this place.
shyeng shik shyeng shik tob chu ngawé lha
Arise, arise, goddess endowed with ten powers!
dü lé mi da tukjé wang gi na
You, the three jewels, care for beings
semchen dön la gongpé könchok sum
With compassion that never fades with time.
yi kyi trul shying shampé né diru
I beseech you, victors with your retinues, to come to this place
gyalwa khor ché malü shek su sol
Replete with offerings I’ve arrayed and those I’ve mentally created.
benza samaya dza
vajra samaya jaḥ
3. Receiving the Bestowal of Empowerment
Recite the 4-line verse beginning with, “Holy flowers, holy garlands…,” followed by “Om Vajra
Pushpé Ah Hung...”
metok dampa trengwa dampa dang
Holy flowers, holy garlands,
silnyen nam dang jukpa duk chok dang
Music, balms, the finest parasols,
marmé chok dang dukpö dampa yi
The best lamps, and sacred incense—
gyalwa dedak la ni chöpar gyi
All these I offer to you, triumphant ones.

om benza pupé ah hung
oṃ vajra-puṣpe āḥ hūṃ
om benza dhupé ah hung
oṃ vajra-dhūpe āḥ hūṃ
om benza aloké ah hung
oṃ vajra-āloke āḥ hūṃ
om benza gendhé ah hung
oṃ vajra-gandhe āḥ hūṃ
om benza nevidé ah hung
oṃ vajra-naivedye āḥ hūṃ
om benza shapta ah hung
oṃ vajra-śabda āḥ hūṃ
Supplication:
chomden deshyin shekpa kün
All transcendent conquerors, those advanced to the true nature,
chomden daknyi chenpo nam
All great and transcendent conquerors,
tukjé rangshyin chen nam kyi
Lords whose very nature is compassion:
dak la wangkur dzé du sol
Grant me empowerment, I pray!
With that request, those advanced to the true nature raise the nectar-filled vase and state:
jitar tampa tsam gyi ni
As soon as the Buddha was born,
lha nam kyi ni trü sol tar
The gods bathed him,
lha yi chu ni dakpa yi
We likewise bathe your body
deshyin dak gi kutrü sol
With this water of the gods.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekata samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva-tathāgata abhiṣekata samaya śrīye hūṃ
shyé wangkurwé ku gang drima dak chu lhakma yar lüpa lé tsomo la dönyö drubpa dang
This bestowal of empowerment causes the water from the vases to fill their bodies, cleansing
all impurities. The excess water wells up at the crown of the central deity's head to become
Accomplisher of Meaningful Acts.8
shyen nam la sosö rik kyi u gyen
Each Tārā is likewise crowned with the buddha of her respective enlightened clan.
wang gi lha nam drolmar gyur né
All the deities who granted empowerment become Tārā.
dza hung bam ho
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
shyepé nyimé du timpar gyur
The visualized and wisdom deities dissolve indivisibly into one another.
4. Sealing the Union of Visualized and Wisdom Deities with a Gesture
Join your palms. Cover the fingernail of your left middle finger with your right middle finger.
Curl your ring fingers inward, pressing down on them with your thumbs.
With this gesture, signifying a blossomed blue lotus, first touch your forehead, then your throat,
heart, right shoulder, and left shoulder, reciting:
om taré tuttaré turé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā
Each time.
5. Presenting the Seven-Part Service
lha dang lhamin chöpen gyi
Gods and demi-gods bow their crowned heads
shyab kyi pemo la tü dé
Respectfully at your lotus feet.
pongpa kün lé drol dzé ma
Liberating mother, who saves us from every misery,
drolma yum la chaktsal lo
To you I pay homage.

jetsün pakma drolma dang
With utterly lucid faith, I pay homage
chok chu dü sum shyukpa yi
To noble Exalted Tārā
gyalwa sé ché tamché la
And all the victors with their heirs
künné ngepé chak gyi o
Who dwell in every direction throughout past, present, and future.

metok dukpö marmé dri
I present material and mentally created offerings,
shyalzé rolmo lasokpa
Such as flowers, incense, lights, perfume, food, and music,
ngöjor yi kyi trul né bul
To the assembly of exalted deities:
pakmé tsok kyi shyé su sol
Accept them, I pray!

tokma mé né danté bar
I admit all wrongdoing I’ve done
mi gé chu dang tsammé nga
Under the sway of mental afflictions,
sem ni nyönmong wang gyurwé
Including the ten corrupting acts and the five incomparable trespasses,
dikpa tamché shakpar gyi
Committed since time immemorial until now.

nyentö ranggyal changchub sem
I rejoice in all goodness cultivated
soso kyewo lasokpé
Through ennobling acts of the past, present, and future
dü sum gewa chi sakpa
By all beings, including pious attendants,
sönam la ni dak yi rang
Solitary sages, awakened heroes, and ordinary individuals.

semchen nam kyi sampa dang
I beseech you to teach
lo yi jedrak jitawar
The great, lesser, and common spiritual approaches
chechung tünmong tekpa yi
According to the range
chö kyi khorlo kor du sol
Of beings’ intentions and capacities.

khorwa jisi matongpar
I implore you not to transcend misery
nya ngen mi da tukjé yi
Until the round of rebirth is entirely emptied.
dukngal gyatsor jingpa yi
Watch over all beings drowning in seas of suffering
semchen nam la zik su sol
And compassionately care for us, I pray.

dak gi sönam chi sakpa
May whatever goodness I've cultivated
tamché changchub gyur gyur né
Result in awakening.
ringpor mi tok drowa yi
May I become, without a moment's delay,
drenpé pal du dak gyur chik
A glorious guide to beings!
6. Perform the cleansing ritual
deshyin shekpa nam dang dé sé la
Accompanied by songs and music,
rinchen bumpa mangpo pö kyi chu
I take many jeweled vases
yi ong lekpar kangwa lu dang ni
Filled with pleasing, scented water to bathe the bodies
rolmor chepa dumé kutrü sol
Of those advanced to the true nature, with their heirs.

dedak ku la tsungpa mepé gö
I dry their bodies with incomparable cloth,
tsang la dri rab göpé ku chi o
Clean and deeply scented.
dené dé lakha dok lek gyurwé
I offer them the finest robes,
naza shintu drishyim dampa bul
Well-dyed and exquisitely fragrant.

gö zang sab la jampa natsok dang
I take myriad fine garments, delicate and soft,
gyen chok gyatrak dé dang dedak gi
And hundreds of exceptional ornaments
pakpa kuntuzang dang jamyang dang
To adorn exalted awakened heroes,
jikten wangchuk sok la ang gyenpar gyi
Such as Ever-Excellent, Gentle Melody, and Lord of the World.

tongsum küntu dringé dangwa yi
Like polishing refined pure gold,
dri chok nam kyi tubwang kün gyi ku
I anoint the radiant bodies of all buddhas
ser jang tsoma jidor jepa tar
With the best of fragrances,
ö chak barwa dedak jukpar gyi
Whose scents pervade the cosmos.
7. Making Offerings
Recite the offering garland of the sixteen goddesses.9
When repeating this ritual numerous times, after reciting the above praise once, it’s sufficient
to recite only the three four-line verses that begin with “Holy flowers, holy garlands...”
8. Present an Extensive Maṇḍala Offering
om benza bhumi ah hung
oṃ vajrabhūmi āḥ hūṃ
shyi yongsu dakpa wangchen ser gyi sa shyi
This foundation is the entirely pure mighty golden ground.
om benza rekhé ah hung
oṃ vajrarekhe āḥ hūṃ
chi chakri khoryuk gi korwé ü su hung
I offer the bordering iron mountains that encircle the central hūṃ;
ri gyalpo rirab
Mount Meru, sovereign among mountains, standing in the center;
shar lüpakpo
In the east, the continent Noble Body;
lho dzambuling
In the South, the continent Rose Apple;
nub balangchö
In the West, the continent Wish-fulfilling Cow;
jang draminyen
In the North, the continent Ominous Sound;
lü dang lüpak
Body and Excellent Body, to the East;
ngayab dang ngayab shyen
Tail Fan and Minor Tail Fan, to the South;
yoden dang lamchok dro
Tremulous and Great Destiny, to the West;
draminyen dang draminyen gyi da
And Ominous Sound and Satellite of Ominous Sound, to the North.
rinpoche riwo paksam gyi shing
I offer jewel mountain; Wish-fulfilling tree;
döjöba mamöpé lotok
Wish-granting cow; Spontaneous harvest.
khorlo rinpoche norbu rinpoche
I offer precious wheel; Priceless gem;
tsünmo rinpoche lönpo rinpoche
Esteemed queen; Valued minister;
langpo rinpoche tachok rinpoche
Cherished elephant; Treasured horse;
makpön rinpoche ter chenpö bumpa
Esteemed general; And vase of abundant treasure;
gekpama trengwama
I offer goddess of allure; Goddess of garlands;
luma garma
Goddess of song; Goddess of dance;
metokma dukpöma
Goddess of flowers; Goddess of incense;
nangsalma drichabma
Goddess of illumination; And goddess of perfume.
nyima dawa rinpoche duk
I offer the sun; The moon; Jeweled parasol;
chok lé nampar gyalwé gyaltsen
And banner of universal victory.
lha dang mi paljor pünsum tsokpa matsangwa mepa di nyi
I offer these magnificent glories and riches of gods and humans, complete and flawless,
drinchen tsawa dang gyüpar chepé palden lama dampa nam dang yidam gyalwé kyilkhor gyi lhatsok
sangye dang changchub sempé tsok dang chepa nam la bulwar gyi o
To the illustrious holy root and lineage lamas, the wisdom deities, the hosts of sacred circles
of deities, and the buddhas and assembly of awakened heroes.
tukjé drowé döndu shyé su sol
I beseech you, in your great compassion, to accept these offerings for the sake of all beings.
shyé né jingyi lab tu sol
Accepting them, grant your blessings, I pray.

sa shyi pö chü juk shing metok tram
I offer this ground, anointed with perfume and strewn with flowers,
rirab ling shyi nyidé gyenpa di
Adorned by Supreme Mountain, the four continents, and the sun and moon:
sangye shying du mik té pulwa yi
Imagining this as a buddha land,
dro kün namdak shying la chöpar shok
By virtue of this offering, may all beings enjoy this pure land.
idam ratna mandala kam nirya tayami
idam ratna maṇḍala kaṃ nirya tayāmi
9. Rendering Praise
tukjé chenpö daknyi ni
Goddess, you manifested from the tear
chukyé shyal gyi gesar lé
On Supreme Compassion’s lotus face.10
namtrul lhamo nyur pa drol
Swiftly liberating hero
jikpa tamché kyob la dü
Who shelters us from all fears, to you I bow.

nyönmong chuter chenpö long
All beings flounder
nampar khyampé semchen kün
In the vast ocean of mental afflictions.
timuk langpö shyenwang gi
You save us from being overcome
zil gyi nön kyob ma la dü
By the foolish elephant of conformity: to you I bow.

dö sé gom dang chönyi dön
You’re a safe haven from the fearsome ogres
yul la chingwé chakdrok dang
Of entangling doubts and habituation with craving and attachment—
künné triwé tetsom gyi
Chains that bind the ultimate nature of reality
shazé jikpa kyob la dü
Within dualistic experience: to you I bow.

döpa chuwö walab dang
You quell at once the turbulent rapids of desire,
deshyin shyedang gompa lé
And the fierce flames of deeply ingrained anger
gyurpé gyu tün tumpö mé
That fuel infernos:
chikchar sö dzé ma la dü
To you I bow.

gopang chok la chomkün gyi
You secure us against the thieves that steal attainment of the supreme state—
tulshyuk jiktsok la ta dang
Routine discipline that regards the mountain of perishable phenomena as an existent self.
nangwa drar gyur trakdok gi
You protect us from the fearsome snakes of jealousy
to drö jikpa kyob la dü
That see appearances as the enemy: to you I bow.

ngagyal sengé dermo yi
You shelter us from the claws of the lion of pride—
tsultrim tawa chokdzin dang
Which value ethical conduct as best—
gyalpö chepa dra dön dzé
And all we fear, such as a ruler’s punishment, enemies, demonic forces, leprosy,
shedral ulpong namchak tok
Separation from loved ones, poverty, lightning, and failure:
dön nyam lasok jikpé tsok
To you who protect from all fear and danger,
malü kyob la dak tö do
I offer praise.
10. Paying Homage
Bring to mind the benefits of this recitation as you pay homage.
om jetsünma pakma drolma la chaktsal lo
Om! To noble Exalted Tārā, Liberator, I pay homage!
chaktsal drolma nyurma pamo
Homage! Taré, swift heroine;
until:
jompa turé rab chok nyi ma
You conquer all hordes of demons, zombies, and ogres: Best Turé!
Recite this homage twice.
11. Approaching the Sacred Circle with Mantra Recitation
Imagine that the green syllable taṃ stands on the circle of a lotus and moon within noble Tārā’s
heart. This mantra garland circles around taṃ:
om taré tuttaré turé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā
When reciting this ten-syllable mantra, it's ideal to complete ten thousand repetitions. Otherwise,
recite the mantra one thousand times.
Change the mantra recitation according to the activity on which you intend to focus:
First, if you wish to augment your intention to awaken, which causes an increase in your goodness,
the syllables bodhicitta are appended to the root mantra before svāhā:
om taré tuttaré turé bodhitsitta soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture bodhicitta svāhā
Likewise, in each of the following cases, syllables are appended to the root mantra before svāhā.
For protection against the eight great fears:
om taré tuttaré turé danatraya soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture dānatraya svāhā
To increase sublime insight:
om taré tuttaré turé pradznya hring hring soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture prajñā11 hrīṃ hrīṃ svāhā
To foster goodness:
om taré tuttaré turé mahapunye soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture mahāpuṇye svāhā
For longevity:
om taré tuttaré turé ayurdadé droom soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture āyurdade bhrūṃ svāhā
To gain power:
om taré tuttaré turé kurukullé nri dza soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture kurukulle nṛ jaḥ svāhā
To avert demonic forces:
om taré tuttaré turé sarwa bighnen bam hung pé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture sarva-vighnān baṃ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
In the face of battle and related adversity:
om taré tuttaré turé bendza taka hana litsa pé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture vajra-taka hana liccha phaṭ svāhā
To avoid slander:
om taré tuttaré turé daha patsa hung pé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture daha paca hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
To take control of the world:
om taré tuttaré turé loka pashang kuru soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture loka-vāśaṃ kuru svāhā
To alleviate poverty:
om taré tuttaré turé mama basu pushting kuru soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture mama vasu puṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā
To increase, wealth, luck, and rainfall:
om taré tuttaré turé mangala shri maha pani soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture maṅgala-śrī mahā-pāṇi svāhā
To end disputes:
om taré tuttaré turé bendza dzola pé pé raksha raksha soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture vajra-jvala phaṭ phaṭ rakṣa rakṣa svāhā
To avert armies:
om taré tuttaré turé hung hung hang shang trignen pé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hūṃ hūṃ haṃsaṃ trignān phaṭ svāhā
To reverse wrongdoing:
om taré tuttaré turé sarwa papam gaté gaté soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture sarva-pāpaṃ gate gate svāhā
To ward off curses:
om taré tuttaré turé tramdu trina tramdu pé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture tramdu trina tramdu phaṭ svāhā
To defend against thieves, bandits, and carnivorous animals:
om taré tuttaré turé hung hung bam ho soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hūṃ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ svāhā
For protection against all varieties of poison:
om taré tuttaré turé sarwa bika tar pé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture sarva-viṣa tara phaṭ svāhā
To avoid conflict and bad dreams:
om taré tuttaré turé hung hung pé pé raksha raksha mam soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hūṃ hūm phaṭ phaṭ rakṣa rakṣa māṃ svāhā
To avert plague:
om taré tuttaré turé namastaré manohara hung hara soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture nāmas tāre manohara12 hūṃ hara svāhā
In the case of ransoming the spirit of a sick person to increase their longevity:
om taré tuttaré turé maritsyé tsé droom nri dza soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture mārīcyai tsé bhrūṃ nṛ jaḥ svāhā
For each recitation, there are specific key instructions for its visualization. Learn these
from The Essential Treasure Vase of Great Bliss.13
Depending on the mantra you recite, extract the corresponding four lines from the homage to
the twenty-one Tārās. Recite that stanza one hundred times after accumulating the activity
mantra. This is a pith instruction.
12. Making Supplications
Repeat her name-mantra, tāre, 300 times, then recite this supplication:
jetsün chomden dema tukjé chen
Noble and compassionate Transcendent Conqueror,
dak dang tayé semchen tamché kyi
We beseech you to help us, beings infinite in number:
drib nyi jang shying tsok nyi nyur dzok né
Purify our two obscurations and quickly complete our twofold cultivation of goodness and wisdom
dzokpé sangye tobpar dzé du sol
So that we may attain perfect enlightenment.

dé ma tob kyi tserab küntu yang
Until then, throughout all our series of lifetimes,
lha dang mi yi dewa chok tob né
Have us find supreme happiness among gods and humans,
tamché khyenpa drubpar jepa la
And help us avoid obstacles, evil spirits, epidemics, illness,
barchö dön gek rim dang né lasok
And all that impedes our spiritual practice to gain omniscience.

dümin chiwar gyurpé né nam dang
We beseech you to swiftly pacify and eliminate
milam ngen dang tsenma ngenpa dang
The eight major fears and any other threats,
jikpa gyé sok nyewar tsewa nam
Including fatal diseases,
nyurdu shyi shying mepar dzé du sol
Nightmares, and evil omens.

jikten jikten lé ni depa yi
May all auspiciousness, happiness, and magnificence,
tashi delek pünsum tsokpa nam
Both worldly and transcendent,
pel shying gyepé dön nam malü kün
Increase and flourish
bemé lhün gyi drubpar dzé du sol
Effortlessly and spontaneously, we pray.

drub la tsön shying damchö pelwa dang
May we endeavor in spiritual practice and may the holy doctrine flourish.
taktu khyé drub shyal chok tongwa dang
May we always meditate on you and see your superb face.
tongnyi dön tok changsem rinpoche
Realizing the meaning of emptiness, may the precious intention to awaken
yar ngö da tar pel shying gyepar dzö
Grow and spread like the waxing moon.

gyalwé kyilkhor zang shying gawa der
In the excellent and joyous pure land of the victor’s sacred circle,
pemo dampa shintu dzé lé kyé
May we be born in an exquisite, sacred lotus.
nangwa tayé gyalwé ngönsum du
Let us actually see Buddha Boundless Light
lungtenpa yang dak gi der tob shok
And receive a clear prophecy of our own enlightenment.

dak gi tserab küntu drubpé lha
Tārā, swift, peaceful, and glorious, with a blue-green face and two hands,
dü sum sangye kün gyi trinlé ma
You are the deity I’ve invoked throughout all my series of lifetimes.
ngo jang shyal chik chak nyi nyur shyi pal
Epitome of all enlightened activities, past, present, and future:
yum gyur utpal nampé tashi shok
May the auspiciousness of the sacred mother who holds the blue lotus prevail!
Aspirations Prayers:
pendé jungwé né chikpu
May the doctrine,
tenpa yün ring nepa dang
Sole source of benefit and happiness, long remain.
tendzin kyebu dampa nam
May the victory banner of the lives
kutsé gyaltsen ten gyur chik
Of those who uphold the doctrine stand firm.

lha yang dü su charbeb shing
May the gods send timely rains
lotok pünsum tsokpar shok
To produce glorious harvests.
gyalpo chö shyin jepa dang
May rulers adhere to the Buddhist doctrine
jikten dak kyang darwar shok
And may their worldly dominions flourish.

men nam tu dang denpa dang
May medicines be potent
sang ngak dejö drubpar shok
And may recitations of mantra be effective.
khandro sinpo lasokpa
May non-human worldly beings, such as ḍākinīs and ogres,
nyingjé sem dangden gyur chik
Be compassionate.

ngensong dukngal mi nyong shying
May humans, whose bodies are better than those of the gods,
kawa chepa mepar yang
Never feel the sufferings of miserable existences
lhawé lhakpé lü kyi ni
Or undergo hardship:
dedak sangye nyur tob shok
May they swiftly attain enlightenment!

changchub sempa nam kyi ni
May all awakened heroes
dro dön tuk la gong drub shok
Accomplish their intention—the welfare of beings.
gönpo yi ni gang gongpa
May all beings
semchen nam la dé jor shok ché jö
Gain everything these lord protectors intend!
For the second maṇḍala offering, begin with the seven-part service (Part 5 above) from“Gods
and demi-gods bow their crowned heads..etc.” and “With utterly lucid faith, I pay homage To
noble Exalted Tārā...etc.” and continue with the cleansing ritual, offering garland, extensive
maṇḍala offering, and praise. Then recite the homage to the twenty-one Tārās three
times. Recite the supplication and aspiration prayers as you did previously.
The third maṇḍala offering is performed in the same fashion as the second, the only difference
being that you recite the homage to the twenty-one Tārās seven times.
In the case of doing repetitions of this ritual, complete just to this point. [Do the conclusion
only once, after the final repetition.]
The Conclusion
This has five parts: 1) offering tormas, 2) admission of faults, 3) request for the deities
to remain in their representations forever, 4) dedication of goodness, and 5) making auspicious
wishes.
1. Offering Tormas
Offer the first torma
Offer the first of the four tormas to noble Tārā.
Turn to face Potala or imagine that you do so.
Join your vajra palms at the level of your heart [in the gesture of offering the torma].
Cleanse the torma with:
ram yam kham
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
Purify the torma with:
om sobhava shuddha sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tongpé ngang lé om lé rinpoche nö du om ah hung ö du shyuwa lé jungwé lhadzé döyön gyi pungpo
zé mishepar gyur
Within emptiness, oṃ becomes a jewel vessel, in which the syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ melt into light
and produce inexhaustible mountains of divine substances and sense pleasures.
Consecrate the torma with seven repetitions of the three syllables:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Imagine that the deities draw up the essence of the torma with their vajra tongues and consume
it.
nama sarva buddha bodhisatanam apratihata shasanam hé hé bhagawaté mahasata sarva buddha awalokité
mabilamwa mabi lampam idam limta grihnapaya grihnapaya hung hung dza dza sarva bipanyaré
soha
namaḥ sarva-buddha-bodhisattvānāṃ apratihata-śāsānāṃ he he bhagavate mahāsattvā sarva-buddhāvalokite
māvilambam māvilambam idaṃ baliṅte gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇāpaya hūṃ hūṃ jaḥ jaḥ sarva-vi-pañcāre
svāhā
Repeat this mantra three times.
jetsünma drolmé dak la jikten dang jikten lé depé ngödrub malüpa tsolwa dang
Noble Tārā, grant me every possible spiritual accomplishment, worldly and transcendent.
jikpa chenpo gyé lasokpa lé tarwar dzé du sol sipé dukha tamché shyiwar dzé du sol
Free me from the eight great fears and all other terrors, and pacify all the sufferings of existence,
I pray.
Offer the second torma:
om akaro mukham sarva dharmanam atyan utpannotata om ah hung pé soha
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Repeating this mantra three times, offer the torma to the vajra protectors of the doctrine.
Entrust them with activity:
chöjin torma di shyé la
Accept this torma I offer:
naljor dakchak khor ché la
Grant us, the adepts,
nemé tsé dang wangchuk dang
Health, longevity, power,
pal dang drak dang kalpa zang
Glory, renown, and good fortune.
longchö gyachen kün tob ching
May we gain great wealth.
shyi dang gyé lasokpa yi
Grant us the spiritual accomplishments
lé kyi ngödrub dak la tsol
Of peaceful, enhancing, and all other activities.
damtsik chen gyi dak la sung
May the protectors honor their promise to watch over us
ngödrub kün gyi dongdrok dzö
And accompany us in gaining every spiritual attainment.
dümin chi dang né nam dang
Prevent untimely death and illness.
dön dang gek nam mepar dzö
Rid us of demons and hindrances.
milam ngen dang tsenma ngen
Bring an end to nightmares,
jajé ngenpa mepar dzö
Dire omens, and bad actions.
jikten dé shying lo lek dang
May the world be happy and this year excellent.
dru nam pel shying chuk pelwa
May crops and livestock flourish.
gelek pünsum tsokpé né
Living with magnificence and goodness,
yi la döpa kün drub shok
May our wishes be fulfilled.
Offer the third torma:
om akaro mukham sarva dharmanam atyan utpannotata om ah hung pé soha
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Repeat this mantra three times and offer the torma.
shyidak nyukmar nepa la bul lo
I offer this torma to the local spirits who watch over this area.
né drön gyi damtsik sungwa dang go shying dongdrok nyenpo dzé du sol
I ask all local and visiting spirits to honor your promises, guard me, and fulfill my requests
as formidable aids and companions.
Offer the fourth torma:
om nama sarva tathagata awalokité om sambhara sambhara hung
oṃ namaḥ sarva-tathāgatāvalokite | oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ ||
Repeat this mantra three times.
rik druk nyingjé drön la ngo o
I dedicate this offering to my guests worthy of compassion, the six classes of beings.
nyurdu lanamepa sangye kyi gopang tobpar gyur chik
May they swiftly gain the state of unsurpassable enlightenment.
deshyin shekpa rinchen mang la chaktsal lo
I pay homage to Buddha Abundant Jewels.
deshyin shekpa zuk dzé dampa la chaktsal lo
I pay homage to Buddha Holy Beautiful Form.
deshyin shekpa ku jam lé la chaktsal lo
I pay homage to Buddha Infinite Body.
deshyin shekpa jikpa tamché dang dralwa la chaktsal lo
I pay homage to Buddha Entirely Fearless.

dikpa chiyang mija shying
This is the teaching of the Buddha:
gewa pünsum tsokpa yi
Commit no wrongdoing whatsoever;
rang gi sem ni yongsu dul
Carry out magnificent ennobling acts;
di ni sangye tenpa yin
Subdue your own mind completely.
Make aspirations:
jinpa gyachen gyurpa di yi tü
May the momentum of this great generosity
drowé nang né rangjung sangye shok
Have all beings become self-arisen buddhas.
ngön gyi gyalwa nam kyi madralwé
May the hosts of beings who weren’t liberated by previous victors
kyendrö tsok nam jinpé drol gyur chik
Be liberated by this generosity.
2. Admission of Faults
majorpa dang nyampa dang
In relation to all the faults committed in this ritual—
tsowo nüpa machipé
Anything I failed to obtain or let go to waste,
dir ni gyiwa gang gyipa
And especially, anything I didn’t do—
dé kün gönpö zöpar dzö
Lord protectors, I beg your pardon.

chepa dang ni lhakpa dang
In all these cases—when something was missing or in excess,
chogé yenlak nyampa sok
Any parts of the ritual that proved inadequate,
dak gi jengé chichi pa
And anything else I forget—
dé kün khyé kyi zöpar sol
I ask for your patience.
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra three times.
3. Request for the Deities to Remain in their Representations Forever
om, dir ni ten dang lhenchik tu
I implore you to remain here indivisible from these sacred forms
khorwa si du shyuk né kyang
For as long as the round of rebirth endures.
nemé tsé dang wangchuk dang
In excellent fashion, grant us health, longevity,
chok nam lekpar tsal du sol
Wealth, and the best of everything.
om supratita benza yé soha
oṃ supratiṣṭha-vajraye svāhā
Regarding deities for whom you don’t have a representation:
om, khyé kyi semchen dön kün dzé
Om! You’ve served all beings:
jesu tünpé ngödrub tsol
Grant us the corresponding spiritual attainments.
sangye yul du shek né kyang
Even though you now depart for your buddha realm,
lar yang jönpar dzé du sol
I pray you may return again.
bendza mu
vajra-muḥ
With this, ask them to depart.
4. Dedication of Goodness
gewa di yi kyewo kün
May these ennobling acts
sönam yeshe tsok dzok shing
Lead all beings to complete the twofold cultivation of goodness and wisdom,
sönam yeshe lé jungwé
And may they attain the two bodies of enlightenment
dampa ku nyi tobpar shok
Whose very source is goodness and wisdom.

sönam tobchen di yi tü
May all patrons and their inner circle
jindak khor dangché nam la
Accomplish their aims during this lifetime.
tsé dir sampé döndrub ching
May their obstacles be pacified and auspiciousness prevail.
barché shyi né trashipa
May their every wish be fulfilled with utmost auspiciousness!

sampa drubpé tashi shok
Furthermore, may all misfortune
shyenyang kyewa di nyi du
Be assuaged in our lifetimes.
mitün chok kün shyiwa dang
May we enjoy the excellence
tsering nemé pün sum tsok
Of a long and healthy life,
tendu dewa tobpar shok
And gain lasting happiness.

sangye ku sum nyepé jinlab dang
By the blessings of the attainment of the three bodies of enlightenment,
chönyi mingyur denpé jinlab dang
By the blessings of the unalterable truth of the nature of reality,
gendün miché dünpé jinlab kyi
And by the blessings of the undivided spiritual community,
jitar ngö shyin mönlam drubpar shok
May these aspirations be fulfilled just as we’ve dedicated them.
5. Making Auspicious Wishes
pünsum tsokpa ngawa ser gyi riwo dra
Om! Apparent magnificence, like a mountain of gold,
jikten sum gyi gönpo drima sum pangpa
Lord of the Three Worlds, you have relinquished the three obscurations.
sangye pema namgyé dab dré chen ngawa
Buddha with eyes like the petals of a blossoming lotus,
dé ni khyö la dering shyijé tashi shok
You are the first ennobling auspicious fortune of this world.

dé yi nyewar tenpé chok rab yomé pa
What you revealed, sublime and tranquil,
jikten sum na drak shing lha dang mi chöpa
Renowned in the three worlds, honored by gods and humans—
chö kyi dampa kyegu nam la shyijé pa
The sacred teachings that calm many beings
dé ni khyö la dering shyijé tashi shok
And the second ennobling auspicious fortune of this world.

damchö denpa töpé tashi kyi chuk ching
The spiritual community, imbued with the sacred teachings, rich with auspicious education,
gendün mi dang lha dang lhamin yön gyi né
Recipients of homage from gods, demi-gods, and humans,
tsok kyi chok rab ngotsa shé dang pal gyi shyi
Sublime and best assembly, who knows humility, the basis of glory—
dé ni khyö la dering shyijé tashi shok
The third ennobling auspicious fortune of this world.
Conclude with this and other prayers.

While there are many different versions of the ritual called The Fourfold Maṇḍala Offering Ritual
to Tārā, the most authoritative comes from Nāgārjuna, who compiled this ritual based
on The Manifest Source Tantra of Tārā. Although that version lacked a description of the
deity and had words missing, I disregarded these discrepancies, added new parts from various
pith instructions, and arranged the entire work into a liturgy. I, Gyalwé Nyugu Kyentsé
Lha,14 completed this work in response to the insistent request of Jikmé Trinlé Özer15 of
Eastern Tibet.

This was written by the virtuous practitioner Lerab Dorjé, who was the master’s subject. Excellent!
Excellent! Excellent!

| Translated by Chönyi Drolma, August 2014. First published on Lotsawa House (with permission)
as part of the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2021.
↑ Note that the Tibetan here speaks of eleven sections but then goes on to label both the cleansing
ritual and making of offerings as the eighth.↑ Ever-Excellent is a translation of
the Sanskrit Samantabhadra.↑ i.e., Samantabhadra, Mañjughoṣa and Avalokiteśvara.↑ This may
refer to the chöpön lighting incense and offering a katak, though that should be confirmed
with the lama.↑ Skt. Śvetaketu↑ Literally, (smaller) boats and (larger) ships.↑ Skt. Sarasvatī;
Tib. dbyangs can ma.↑ Skt. Amoghasiddhi↑ The Garland of Offerings of the Sixteen Vajra
Goddesses: The Lute of the Gandharvas of the Longchen Nyingtik. Tulku Dawa Zangpo comments
that you can also just recite the mantras of the sixteen offering goddesses.↑ i.e.,
Avalokiteśvara’s face.↑ Or prajñe.↑ Possibly manohare.↑ The text containing these instructions
is located in Vol 10 (T’ha) pp. 307-324 of the Adzom Drukpa edition of Rikzin Jikmé Lingpa’s
Collected Works. Its full title is: The inner ḍākinī practice of the female Buddha
from Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse: The Essential Treasure Vase of Great Bliss (Klong
chen snying thig las/ yum ka mkha' 'gro'i nang sgrub bde chen snying po'i gter bum).↑ Rigdzin
Jikmé Lingpa↑ The First Dodrupchen