An Aspiration for the Final Age
by Jigme Lingpa

namo, könchok sum la nying né kyab su chi
Namo! From the depths of my heart, I take refuge in the Three Jewels.
kyemé chö la zöpa matobpar
Until I gain acceptance of the unborn nature of reality,
ngendrö né namyang mi tung shying
May I never again fall into the lower realms
lhawé lhakpé lü ten tobpar shok
But attain a human body, superior even to a godly form.

tori tob kyang dukngal nam sum gyi
Even if I attain the higher realms, nowhere in saṃsāra
dam la ma shyak khorwa yö min na
Is free from the bonds of the three types of suffering.
dendrö ten la nya ngen dawé gek
And even within fortunate realms, may I avoid a form
mikhom né dang tsungden lü pong shok
That would obstruct nirvāṇa, such as the unfree states.

dom min gyünden gyal lön dik tochen
May I avoid birth as an evil king or minister lacking restraint,
yul lé ga dang shyal ché khyokpor chö
Who takes delight in warfare and twists and flouts the law.
jewö dren gyur nyamchung narwa dang
May I not become a servant, lowly and tormented,
tsongpa dang ni yönchen lü pong shok
Or a merchant, or anyone who is devious or at fault.

könchok kor trok gendün lejé dang
May I not become a steward who steals the Saṅgha’s wealth,
den drol nyimé kor la rang gar chö
Or one without qualities or liberation who appropriates funds.
lek mön dönnyer khyimpa sün jinchen
May I avoid rebirth as a renunciant who offends householders
shyen gyü sekpé gejong lü pong shok
As they strive for better rebirth and who torments the minds of others.

rangshyin ngenpa drul duk tabu dang
May I not become someone as ill-natured as a serpent
shyen jor la dang lha mayin gyi sem
Or one whose envy of others’ wealth resembles an asura’s.
kyabö lu shying chö la dangwa dang
May I avoid rebirth as one who deceives the venerable
ku dang trok jom ngönpé lü pong shok
And despises the Dharma, or as a thief, a robber or a hunter.

tsammé nga am dé dang nyewa nga
May I avoid the five boundless crimes and five similar misdeeds,
mi gé chu la gyösem mewar chö
And refrain from remorselessly committing the ten non-virtues.
nak la mé bar drang tsang tibpa sok
May I avoid all major forms of wrongdoing and misconduct,
khana mato ché lé tarwar shok
Such as setting forests ablaze or stealing honey from hives.

detar tar né dani ngabgyé tar
Avoiding such plights, now, at the close of the five hundred,1
kyebü lü ten milü rinpoche
Having gained the precious support of a human body,
rabtu jung ngam chikshö yang ni rung
Whether as a monastic or upholder of lay vows,
changchub sempé rikchen tobpar shok
May I inherit the lineage of the bodhisattvas.

kyé ma tak tu tekpa chenpö lam
As soon as I’m reborn, may I meet a master who flawlessly
manor ngönsum tönpé lama dang
And authentically teaches the Mahāyāna path,
jal né nampa küntu nyé jé ching
And by pleasing him or her in every way,
tö sam gompé sherab denpar shok
May I gain the wisdom of hearing, contemplation and meditation.

deyang sampa changchub sem dangden
Furthermore, by possessing the motivation of bodhicitta
jorwa parol chin druk la gompé
And familiarizing myself with the application of the six perfections,
lam nga sa chu ngak kyi denö la
May I gain the supreme good fortune to traverse all at once
chikchar dröpé kalwa chokden shok
The five paths and ten stages and master the tantra collection!

Composed by Dzogchenpa Rangjung Dorje, as requested by Dungsampa2 Changchub Gyaltsen, in keeping
with these sorrow-inducing times and circumstances.

| Translated by Matthias Staber, Patrick Dowd and Han Kop, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.
With gratitude to Tulku Dawa Rinpoche and Khenpo Sonam Tsewang for their clarifications.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "dus mthar gdab pa'i smon lam", in klong chen snying thig rtsa pod.
5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen Publications,
1994. Vol. 1: 218–220.
↑ This refers to the final five hundred years of the Dharma.↑ Dungsam is an ancient name for
Pemagatshel in East Bhutan.