Aspiration to Be Reborn in the Realm of Sukhāvatī
by Jigme Lingpa

chomdendé duldral shintu nampar dakpa la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Blessed One, immaculate and infinitely pure!

sangye sönam pungpo lé drubpé
In this realm of infinite radiance and bliss,
ö nang tayé dewachen gyi shying
Formed from the accumulated merit of the Buddha,
dé na shyukpé gönpo öpakmé
There resides the protector Amitābha of boundless life,
kutsé pakmé shyab la chaktsal lo
At whose feet I prostrate myself in homage:
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

gang khyö jikten wangchuk gyalpö drung
When you were known as the bhikṣu Dharmākara,
gelong chö kyi jungné shyé drak tsé
In the presence of Buddha Lokeśvararāja,
shyingkham zungwar mönpé damcha la
You vowed and aspired to create an excellent pure realm,
lamar ja o nyurdu kab yer sol
Saying, “I honour you. Sanction this forthwith, I pray!”
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

shyön sha shintu chakpé laktil dang
The ground is even and fit to be compared
nyampé pé jar öpé galda ni
To the soft and supple palms of an infant,
chu shying si du mi ngön tadrü khyön
But with vast, immeasurable rivers and plains,
rinchen natsok chal du trampé jé
All overlaid with various types of jewels.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

lhünpo chuter khoryuk ri nakpö
This delightful realm has no Meru, no vast ocean,
ti né palpa mepé nyamga shying
No ring of black mountains or ordinary dwellings.
rinchen na dün lé drub jönpa ni
Its wish-fulfilling tree of the seven types of jewels
paktsé tong dang drukgyé pong su nyek
Stands a thousand yojanas wide, six hundred high.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

yaldab metok drebü düpa la
When the branches, all laden with foliage, fruit and flowers
ser gyi drawé changpar dri shyön gyi
And festooned with golden chains, stir upon the scent-bearing breeze,
kul lé chokmi shepé drayang kün
They produce a sweet rustling and humming,
yi ong nyen dang tünpa dar dir drok
Pleasant sounds that one never tires of hearing.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

drisung lhakpar gyepé metok gi
Flowers that emit the sweetest perfumed scent
künné küntu trampé ti tang ni
Fall as a carpet of tribute, seven bodies deep,
mi dreng dün du nyekpé mi ngompar
Endlessly enchanting and extending all around,
nen na nem la tek na parwé dren
Which yields underfoot, then is instantly restored.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

lha dang mi lé ngensong lhamin gyi
Only gods and humans are known; even the names
ming tsam mi drak jor shying gyepa dang
Of the lower realms or of the asuras are unfamiliar.
lo lek pünsum tsokpé dewa yi
Such are its delights of riches and fine harvests,
ngompa mepé pal la ming chakpa
It is called ‘Splendour of Which One Never Tires’.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

bab tek chok tu dewé pö chü lung
As the easily fordable rivers of scented water
chachö shyenwang mayin yi la bab
Flow placidly by without roiling uncontrollably,
nampar dé dang nyenpé chok mi shé
Their charming sound, of which one never tires,
mi tak shyi dang dakmé dön la tön
Communicates impermanence, peace and no-self.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

damdzab pangpé ser gyi jema la
On golden sands entirely free from mud and mires,
shyé dang trung trung ngang ngur karenda
Swans, cranes, wild geese, ducks, karaṇḍa birds,
né tso ri kek maja kulana
Parrots, sārika birds,1 peacocks, kulana birds
kalapingké gyümang la nyenpa
And mythical kalaviṅkas2 sing like the playing of a sitar.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

dé lé nawé dü té rek tsor kün
These sounds3 and all sensory impressions
rinchen nam sum dra dang tsemé shyi
Convey the meaning of the Three Jewels, the four immeasurables,
sa dang parchin tob chu mi jik shyi
The stages, transcendent perfections, ten strengths, four fearlessnesses
ma dré chobgyé dzokpé dön dangden
And eighteen unshared attributes.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

tanadukpé kyetsal jönpa lé
From the flowers and trees in enchanting groves,
döpé yönten gyatrak möla jung
Sensory delights appear instantly by the score,
barnang la trul shyalmé khang lasok
And the immeasurable palace manifests in mid-air—
shyentrul wang jé kyi kyang dodar min
Wonders unrivalled even in Controlling Others' Emanations.4
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

dé na za dang gyukar nyintsen cha
No planets and no stars, neither day nor night,
khyim dang dé la yongsu dzinpé sem
No households and no possession of them—
ten nemé kyang chötrin trowa yi
Instead, there are heavenly goddesses who produce
lha yi bu mö shintu nyam dewa
Clouds of offerings that inspire the utmost delight.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

gang na tso shying shyepé gyalwa dé
As many buddhas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges
ngakpa jö la ganggé dul nyé kyi
Continuously extol the qualities of the victorious one
sangye nam kyang tsönpa mi dorwé
Who lives and presides here and honour as well
chenrezik dang tuchen tobpa ang nyen
Avalokiteśvara and Mahāsthāmaprāpta,
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

shyingkham dir sön gewé tsawa la
Those who reach this realm with virtue obscured
dribpa dangché pemö ngal dzin dang
Appear enclosed within the womb of a lotus.
kyilmo trung ché möla kyé nyika
Then, while sitting cross-legged, immediately arise
kyebu chenpö tsen dang yangdak den
A second time and gain the marks of a great being.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

nyenrang changsem lhami nampachen
Śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattvas, in human and divine form,
kün kyang wangnön zöpa tobpa té
Have sharp faculties and have attained acceptance.5
barnang la dro lokpar mi tung shying
They fly through the sky; they will never regress;
sangye tong dang mindral damchö nyen
And they hear sacred Dharma without losing sight of the buddhas.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

samten dang ni ngönpar shepa la
With skill in the concentrations and supercognitions,
khepé sherab kyi ni namyé zö
With the insight that accepts all distinctions,
ma dam mi nga wangpo mi yo shying
Not unrestrained but with senses under control,
kün shé yönten tayé mu mepa
And with the infinite, unbounded qualities of omniscience—
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

künjung gyundré pangpé lamden gyi
Through the true path that eliminates the causes and results of origination,
gokpa ngön du jepé drachom kyang
The arhats, too, actualize cessation.
namtar sum gyi ying la ukchung né
They find relief in the space of threefold liberation
özer chenpö wangkur la jorwa
And receive the empowerment of great light rays.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

kechik rer ten chö kyi namdrang kyang
The Dharma that is taught in every instant
drangwar mi zö dzutrul chenpo yi
Is incalculable, the miraculous powers so extensive
shyingkham shyen nyul chö lé tobpa yi
That they permit travel to other realms and,
jewa trak gyé tingdzin gojepa
By receiving Dharma, access to billions of samādhis.
dewachen gyi shying du kyewar shok
May I be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm!

dorna gang gi tsen dang dra dang ni
In short, whoever hears your name or speech,
tawa yi la gompar jepa yang
Whoever sees you, or meditates upon you,
shyingkham dewachen du ukjinpé
Will be reborn in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm.
tukkyé damcha luwa mepé chir
As this vow of exalted bodhicitta is infallible,
khyö kyi shyendön dzepé pé da la
Your deeds for others’ benefit are analogous
gyatsö dü lab ngalwé kab tenpé
To the unfaltering tides of the great ocean.
buram shingpé shyal né küngawo
As the descendent of Ikṣvāku6 told Ānanda:
khyö lang nub kyi chok sukha tön la
“Stand up and face westward,
metok tor né talmo jar jé té
Present a flower and fold your hands.
dzokpé sangye ö nang pak tumé
Pay homage to the perfect Buddha of Limitless Light,7
duldral shintu nampar dakpa la
Immaculate and infinitely pure.
chak tsol dé tsen dribpa mepa ni
His undefiled name
chok chur drak né gyalwa denam kyang
Is renowned in the ten directions,
ngakpa jöpar sung na dakchak ni
Lauded by all the victorious ones.”
lü dang longchö töpa mepar bul
And so we offer our bodies and possessions without holding back,
jé shing sakpé dikdrib tolwa dang
Admit the negative acts we have committed and obscurations we have accumulated,
chab chik dzepa gyatsor yi rang bul
And rejoice in the ocean of enlightened deeds that have been performed.
takpar chökhor dangché shyuk su sol
We request you to turn forever the wheel of Dharma and remain here,
getsa jinyé chipa drowa kün
And we dedicate all the sources of virtue that exist
dewachen du kyewé gyur ngo na
So that all beings may be born in Sukhāvatī, the blissful realm.
mönpa jishyin drubpé tashi shok
May all be auspicious so that our aspirations come true just as we have made them!

I, Gyalwé Nyugu Khyentsé Lha, wrote down this aspiration in accordance with the Sūtra of Amitābha8
after I was urged to do so from afar by Jigme Trinle Özer, my perfect student from
Dokham, and in person by the two named Jigme Losalchen,9 who made enthusiastic requests.

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Adam Pearcey and Barry Cohen for the Longchen Nyingtik
Project, 2021, following the commentary by Rigdzin Gargyi Wangchuk, Gateway to the Realm
of Great Bliss. With gratitude to Tulku Dawa for his clarifications.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "bde can zhing bkod smon lam", in klong chen snying thig rtsa pod.
5 Vols. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen Publications, 1994. BDRC W1KG13585.
Vol. 1: 509–513.

Other Primary Sources
“'od dpag med kyi bkod pa'i mdo.” In bka' 'gyur/ (dpe bsdur ma/). 109 vols. Pe cin: krung go'i
bod rig pa'i dpe skrun khang, 2006-2009. BDRC W1PD96682. 39: 715 – 798
rig 'dzin gar gyi dbang phyug. “'jigs gling bde smon 'bru 'grel/ (yi).” In gsung 'bum/_rig 'dzin
gar gyi dbang phyug. 5 vols.  nyag a 'dzin rong : 'chi med byang chub gling, 200?. BDRC
W19884. 5: 353 – 371

Version: 1.0-20211112
↑ Possibly turdus salica, an Indian bird famed for its melodious notes.↑ A small sparrow-like
bird renowned for its extremely beautiful voice, the kalapingka or kalavingka is referenced
in numerous sources of Buddhist literature, such as Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita.↑ In other
words, the sounds of the trees, wind, rivers and birds mentioned above.↑ The highest of
the six heavens of the desire realm.↑ The third level of the path of joining. Once acceptance
has been attained there can be no more falling into the lower realms.↑ i.e., Buddha Śākyamuni↑
Amitābha↑ The Array of Amitābha (Skt. amitābhavyūhasūtra or āryāmitābhavyūhanāmamahāyānasūtra,
Toh 49).↑ The exact identity of these two students is unsure, yet they possibly
belonged to Dzogchen Monastery. It is likely that one was Jigme Losal Özer, who wrote
the catalogue for the Core Texts of the Heart-Essence, called An Illuminating Ornament of
Brilliant Sunlight.