Calling the Guru from Afar
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

dü sum sangye tamché düpé ngowo
Essence and embodiment of all the buddhas of the three times,
guru pema jungné dang yermé
You are indivisible from Guru Padmasambhava,
trisong detsen samshyin du jönpa
And have come in accordance with the intent of Trisong Detsen—
künkhyen rigdzin chö kyi gyalpo
Omniscient vidyādhara, King of Dharma,
rangjung dorjé jikme lingpa khyé khyen no
Rangjung Dorje—‘Self-Arisen Vajra’—Jigme Lingpa, know me, care for me!

kater mengak gi terdzö
You are a treasury of the Buddha’s Words, the treasure revelations, and pith instructions,
ngagyur rigdzin gyi tsukgyen
The crown ornament of the vidyādharas of the Early Translations School,
khandro bumtrak gi mingpo
And elder brother to hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs—
khyentsé özer khyé khyen no
Khyentse Özer—‘Rays of Wisdom and Love’—know me, care for me!

tek chok dorjé tsemo yi shingta
Pioneer of the supreme vehicle, the vajra pinnacle,1
sangdak pawö tuksé kyi gyalpo
Sovereign of the heroic Lord of Secrets’ heart-sons,
jampal chökyi shenyen khyé khyen no
Jampal Chökyi Shenyen—‘Mañjuśrī, Spiritual Friend’—know me, care for me!

tertön drubtob tamché kyi gyalpo
King of all treasure revealers and accomplished adepts,
nyikdü ten dro tadak gi kyab chik
Sole refuge of the teachings and all beings in this degenerate age,
sangwa nyingtik zabmo yi dzö dzin
Treasurer of the profound and secret Heart Essence,
pema wangchen rolpa tsal khyen no
Pema Wangchen Rolpa Tsal—‘Mighty Lotus, Powerful Display’—know me, care for me!

khedrub longchen rabjam kyi jezung
You were cared for by the learned and accomplished Longchen Rabjam,
tukgyü changchub sem nyi kyi tsal jong
Perfected the two types of bodhicitta in your mind-stream,
nangsi ösal chöku ru tokpa
And realized appearance and existence to be luminous dharmakāya—
gyalwé nyugu khyentsé lha khyen no
Gyalwé Nyugu Khyentse Lha—‘Fresh Shoot of the Victorious Ones, Deity of Wisdom and Love’—know
me, care for me!

khyé kyi tukjé yi dak la
With your compassion, look upon me
nyintsen dü druk tu zik shik
Day and night, throughout the six times.
chi nang sangwa yi barché
Having pacified and naturally liberated
rang shyi rangdrol du gyur né
Outer, inner and secret obstacles,
tsé lhak ji né kyi bardu
For the remainder of my life,
rimé gyalten ni pelwé
May my altruistic wish to spread the non-sectarian teachings of the Buddha
lhaksam gongpel du shok chik
Only strengthen and increase!

kater mindrol gyi dampa
The ripening and liberating spiritual instructions of the kama and terma,
jedrak nyingtik gi tenpa
And especially the teachings of the Heart Essence,
rimö marmé tar gyurpa
Have come to resemble a mere painted candle.
ché cher salwa ru jepé
Grant us now the power and accomplishments
tu dang ngödrub dé tsol chik
To make them shine ever more brightly!
khorwa dong né truk nü jin gyi rang lob shik
Bless us with the ability to empty saṃsāra from its very depths!

On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, while in Darjeeling, I wrote down whatever came to
my mind. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Han Kop, 2020.

Source: ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "bla ma rgyang ‘bod" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros
kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 4: 532–534
↑ This refers to the Great Perfection teachings.