Descent of Blessings of the Eight Vidyādharas1
by Jigme Lingpa

yeshe kyi khorlo tamché khakhyab tu separ gyur
All the primordial wisdom maṇḍalas awaken in the sky, filling it completely.
om hung a la la ho | bhagavan samaya ho | samaya tom
oṃ hūṃ a la la hoḥ | bhagavān samaya hoḥ | samaya sthaṃ
Accompanied by music, melodiously chant the following:
hung, kalpa sipé dangpo la
Hūṃ! At the beginning of this aeon—the dawn of existence—
dakmé dorjé heruké
When the heruka of the view of selflessness
zungdzin rudra dralwé tsé
Liberated the rudra of duality
tsok gyé dakpé durtrö jung
The eight pure consciousnesses arose as charnel grounds.
khokpa dru shyi go shyipa
The four parts of Rudra’s body became the four doors
deshek shyukpé shyalmé khang
Of the palace where the bliss-gone ones abide.
pungpo kham dang kyemché nam
Bless the aggregates, elements and sense sources
den sum ngowor jin pob chik
As the essence of the three seats!2
yul gyi ming ni dzambüling
The name of the place is Jambudvīpa.

sharchok durtrö silwé tsal
In the east3 lies the charnel ground Cool Grove4
rudré nying dang shyingkyong ni
Where Rudra’s heart is found.
lang go karpo dri tö dzin
The local protector has the face of an elephant, is white in colour and holds a knife and a
skull-cup.
chokkyong wangpo dorjé chen
The directional guardian is Indra, holding a vajra.
luwang tayé drul go deng
The nāga king is Ananta, and he has serpent heads.
chu trin kar la jönshing ser
The river and clouds are white, and the charnel tree is yellow.
né ma chenmo ké'u ri ma
The great protectress is Gaurī.
chörten dé jé tsekpa né
From the stūpa Blissful Mound—5
yangdak drubpé rigdzin ni
Hūṃkāra, vidyādhara who accomplished Yangdak,
hungchen karé jin pob chik
Shower down your blessing!

hung, lhochok durtrö khujuk tsal
Hūṃ! In the south lies the charnel ground Cuckoo Grove
rudré lak yé shyingkyong ni
Where Rudra’s right hand is found.
mahé dongchen drul shyak nam
The local protector has the face of a buffalo and holds a serpent lasso.
chokkyong shinjé bechön chen
The directional guardian is Yama, holding a club.
luwang jokpo trin ngokya
The nāga king is Takṣaka. The clouds are grey,
chulung labchen jönshing jang
The river turbulent, and the charnel tree is green.
né ma chenmo tsaurima
The great protectress is Caurī.
chörten rinchen ö tro né
From the stūpa Blazing Jewel—
jampal drubpé rigdzin ni
Mañjuśrīmitra, vidyādhara who accomplished Mañjuśrī,
mandzumitré jin pob chik
Shower down your blessing!

hung, nubchok durtrö pema tsek
Hūṃ! In the west lies the charnel ground Lotus Mound
rudré tsenma shyingkyong ni
Where Rudra’s phallus is found.
chusin dongchen la li ha
The local protector Laliha has the face of a sea-monster.
chokkyong chulha lu dungkyong
The directional guardian is the water god Varuṇa, and the nāga king is Saṅkhapāla.
trin chen dra drok chushing mar
Billowing clouds rumble with thunder, and the river and the charnel tree are red.
né ma chenmo pramoha
The great protectress is Pramohā.
chörten zi ö barwa né
From the stūpa Majestic Blazing Light—
tamdrin drubpé rigdzin ni
Nāgārjuna-garbha, vidyādhara who accomplished Hayagrīva,
ludrub nyingpö jin pob chik
Shower down your blessing!

hung, jangchok durtrö langkatsek
Hūṃ! In the north lies the charnel ground Laṅka Mound
rudré kang yön shyingkyong ni
Where Rudra’s left leg is found.
ta dong dükha chungmar ché
The local protector has the face of a horse, is grey in colour and is accompanied by his consort.
chokkyong nöjin lu tob gyu
The directional guardian is a yakṣa, the nāga king is Karkoṭaka.
chulung nyö dang trin jang truk
The river is raging; the green clouds rumble.
jönshing asutana dzé
The beautiful charnel tree is called Asutana.
né ma chenmo bé ta li
The great protectress is Vetālī.
chörten rangjung dechen né
From the stūpa Naturally Arisen Great Bliss—
purpa drubpé rigdzin ni
Prabhāhasti, vidyādhara who accomplished Kīlaya,
prabhahasti jin pob chik
Shower down your blessing!

hung, sharlho durtrö lhündrub tsek
Hūṃ! In the south-east lies the charnel ground Spontaneously Accomplished Mound
rudré nangtrol shyingkyong ni
Where Rudra’s intestines are found.
ra dong chokkyong melha ser
The local protector has the face of a goat. The directional guardian is Agni, yellow in colour.
luchen pema norbu dzin
The great nāga king holds a lotus and jewel.
chulung ngur jé trin marser
The river is raging, the clouds are orange.
jönshing trowo gelpé tab
The charnel tree appears wrathful and crooked.
né ma chenmo pukkasi
The great protectress is Pukkasī.
chörten ké u tishen né
From the stūpa Ke’u Tishen—
mamo drubpé rigdzin ni
Dhanasaṃskṛta, vidyādhara who accomplished the mātṛkās,
dhanasamskri jin pob chik
Shower down your blessing!

hung, lhonub durtrö maha guhy
Hūṃ! In the south-west lies the charnel ground Mahāguhya
rudré gowo shyingkyong ni
Where Rudra’s head is found.
khadok ngönpo mi la shyön
The local protector is blue in colour and rides a human.
chokkyong bö drok lu pé chen
The directional guardian is Rāvaṇa, the nāga king is Mahāpadma.
trin ser gana chulung mar
The ‘gana’ clouds are yellow, and the river is red.
jönshing shanting upala
The charnel tree is called Śāntim Upala.
né ma chenmo gasmari
The great protectress is Ghasmarī.
chörten chenpo kaniné
From the stūpa Kanika—
yönten drubpé rigdzin ni
Vimalamitra, vidyādhara who accomplished Amṛtakuṇḍalin,
bimamitré jin pob chik
Shower down your blessing!

hung, nubjang durtrö hé chenpo
Hūṃ! In the north-west lies the charnel ground Great Hé
rudré lak yön shyingkyong ni
Where Rudra’s left arm is found.
shawé dongchen chewö tsul
The local protector has the face of a deer and is crippled.
chokkyong lung lha lu norgyé
The directional guardian is the wind god Vāyu and the nāga king Vāsuki.
trin chen charbeb chulung nak
Rain pours from massive clouds, and the river is black.
jönshing dzala nakpo la
The tree is called Black Jala.
né ma durtrö dakmo né
The great protectress is Śmaśānī.
chörten rangjung ku ma né
From the stūpa Naturally Arisen Kuma—
chötö drubpé rigdzin ni
Guhyacandra, vidyādhara who accomplished Offering and Praise,
guhya tsendé jin pob chik
Shower down your blessing!

hung, jangshar durtrö loka na
Hūṃ! In the north-east lies the charnel ground Lokana
rudré kang yé shyingkyong ni
Where Rudra’s right leg is found.
ché chang dongchen tsesum chang
The local protector has the face of a jackal, is white in colour and holds a knife and a skull-cup.
chokkyong wangden lu rikden
The directional guardian is Īśāna and the nāga king Jātya.
chulung nakpo trin nyachen
The river is black, and the clouds rumble.
jönshing hala kala la
The charnel tree is called Halakāla.
né ma chenmo tsendali
The great protectress is Caṇḍālī.
chörten gomasala né
From the stūpa Gomasāla—
drakngak drubpé rigdzin ni
Śāntigarbha, vidyādhara who accomplished Fierce Mantra,
shanting garbhé jin pob chik
Shower down your blessing!
om ah hung benza guru pema tötreng tsal | benza samaya siddhi pala hung ah
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru padma tötreng tsal | vajra samaya siddhi phala hūṃ āḥ
At the end of the descent of blessing, melodiously chant the Mighty Skull-Garland’s6 mantra.
Finally, gather the blessings with:
hung hung hung
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
namkha gangwé lhatsok tamché dak né yojé nam la timpé
All the deities who fill the sky dissolve into myself, the place and the materials,
ku sung tuk mizepa gyen gyi khorlor jingyi labpar gyur
And bless everything as the inexhaustible wheel of ornaments of the body, speech, and mind.

| Translated by Han Kop, reviewed by Stefan Mang and edited by Corinne and Dan Ewen, for the
Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020.
↑ This text is extracted from ‘A Precious Casket: A Framework for Accomplishment, from the Ocean-like
Assembly of Awesome Ones’ (dpal chen bka' 'dus rgya mtsho las/ sgrub pa'i khog 'bubs
rin po che'i za ma tog)↑ The deities of the three seats, often referred to as the maṇḍala
of the three seats (gdan gsum dkyil ‘khor), are: 1) the tathāgatas residing in the aggregates
(skandha) and elements (dhātu), 2) the male and female bodhisattvas residing in the
sense fields (āyatana), and 3) male and female wrathful deities residing in the limbs (aṅga).↑
Here each of the eight directions is associated with a particular charnel ground.
There are many such lists of charnel grounds, both in the Old and New Translation Schools,
often with slight differences in names and appearance. It is common for each charnel ground
to have its own associated tree, yakṣa, directional guardian, nāga king, cloud formation,
mountain, and stūpa. In this text we also find the eight Great Ladies such as Gaurī and
the eight vidyādharas such as Hūṃkāra associated with a charnel ground. See also Jamgön Kongtrul
Lodrö Tayé, The Treasury of Knowledge: Book Eight, Part Three: The Elements of Tantric
Practice (Ithaca, N.Y: Snow Lion, 2008), page 288, note 40.↑ Skt. Śītavana.↑ Skt. Śaṅkarakūṭa.↑
Tib. Tötreng Tsal.