Elucidating the Body Maṇḍala

Clarifications on the Recitation Manual of the Female Practice of the Queen of Great Bliss

by Jigme Lingpa

Homage to the venerable Vajrayoginī!

Herein is contained a supplementary text that will remove all doubts concerning the Recitation
Manual[1] of the ḍākinī Queen of Great Bliss, the utterly profound practice of the female
awareness-holder.

Generally in the Mantra Vehicle, the path consists of two stages: the generation phase and the
completion phase. This is in order to purify the impure appearances of the world and its
inhabitants as well as our confused attachment to them. As for the support, the vessel that
is the world; as well as the supported, the essence that is all beings, there is nothing
that is not made of the five elements. The outer elements are the five of earth, water,
fire, wind, and space; the inner elements are the five of flesh, blood, warmth, breath, and
consciousness. You must understand that their essence is the natural purity of the five
female buddhas, just as in the statement ‘Earth and water are Buddhalocanā [and Māmakī…]’.[2]
The empty spaces in the netherworld, terrestrial world and celestial world are known
as the three realms of existence. You should also know that they are naturally awakened as
the pure realms of the awakened ones.

In particular, the aggregates, elements and sense sources; and the faculties, objects and eight
consciousnesses are what appear to us as impure sentient beings. Through the profound
generation phase, which includes the objects of purification and the results of purification,
you will unmistakably know them to have the nature of the deities. You will know the essence
of purity, the nature of reality. When you stabilize this clear appearance taken as
the path, it is called the 'generation phase of the great consummate nature’.[3]

Now, what are the objects of purification and what are the results of purification? The objects
of purification are the stains. This refers to the five aggregates and five elements that
initially arise from the all-ground consciousness and the defiled consciousness, and also
to the collection of consciousnesses that are defined as the sense sources (including
the five faculties) that are the result of dominant conditions and objective conditions. These
are mutually connected as object and subject. The result of purification is the arising
in the form of deities such as the blessed, glorious Samantabhadra, who is the self-cognizing
king of awareness and the embodiment of infinite maṇḍalas. As the Immaculate Confession
Tantra says:

When the secret all-ground is purified within all-pervading space, the mind naturally arises
as the self-cognizing king of awareness, the father of the buddhas of the three times… [4]

Mind is the dominant condition because it is the agent that generates confusion. If you realize
that it lacks true nature you’ll know it to be the ultimate Samantabhadra of the natural
condition, the self-cognizant king of awareness.[5]

The term dharma has many meanings, yet here it refers to the objective condition, which is the
element of mind, [i.e., the object]. Although this could apply to anything with characteristics
in saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, on this occasion it refers to all that appears as the relative
once it is brought within the all-pervading space that is free from conceptual elaboration—the
absolute truth of the nature of reality, which arises as the mother who generates
all maṇḍalas. It is therefore given the name Samantabhadrā, the acted-upon object.[6]

Secondly, although [the deities] remain in the dharmakāya, all-pervading space, in order to
illustrate the union of appearance and emptiness, they are shown to have aspects such as a
face and hands. It is said:

Utter purity of action and actor, mind and its object; I pay homage to Samantabhadra and his
consort![7]

Likewise, to illustrate the five aggregates, it is said:

In the absolute, beings’ aggregate of consciousness is naturally pure. That is the essence of
all the enlightened minds of the Thus Gone Ones.

From here, continuing up to:

I pay homage to the blessed, glorious Vajrākṣobhya!

With this, the characteristics of the objects of purification and the results of purification
are explained. If you analyse this, you will also be able to understand the visualizations
for the deities of the body maṇḍala. Still, [to render this clearly], Samantabhadra is
in the mudrā of meditative equipoise and his consort is in the mudrā of ‘hands folded together
in dharmodaya’. The buddhas of the five families hold in their right hand their respective
sign and in their left, a bell. The consorts hold a bell in their right hand and in
their left, their respective sign. Their colours are also determined by their family. To show
the meaning of this, our own text says:

At her heart, the expanse of the glorious knot,[8]Are the unfabricated, naturally arisen, completely
perfect deities.At the centre of a five-spoked wheelIs the pure nature of the all-ground
consciousness, mind and phenomena:The all-pervading awareness is Samantabhadra.In
union with his consort Samantabhadrā, they are appearance and emptiness indivisible.On the
five spokes are the deities of pure form, feeling, perception,Formation and consciousness:[9]


Here it is gradually explained how the colour of the form of Vairocana, the purity of the aggregate
of form, is white, and so on. Intelligent people might notice that there are minor
discrepancies in the commentaries on the tantras, yet in our own tradition we should rely
on the Dispelling Darkness in the Ten Directions[10] commentary on the Illusory Net,[11]
which is the basis for the hundred peaceful and wrathful deities. If you do not realize the
deities’ objects of purification and results of purification through this kind of generation
phase, you might achieve a clear appearance, but still be deluded, which would be no
different from seeing an ordinary temple—you won’t understand the crucial points of how to
swiftly traverse the path based on the Mantra Vehicle’s path of skilful means.

The Twenty-Four Sacred Places

Furthermore, on the outer level, in this world of Jambudvīpa there are the twenty-four places
where the heroic ones and ḍākinīs naturally gather. The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra says:[12]

In Kulutā[13] and Maru,In Sindhu and Nagara,[14]In Suvarṇadvīpa and Saurāṣṭra,In Gṛhadevatā
and Pretapurī,In Himālaya and Kāñci,In Lampāka and Kaliṅga,In Kośala and Triśakuni,In Kāmarūpa
and Oḍra,In Mālava, Devīkoṭa,Rāmeśvara, and Godāvarī,And in Arbuda, Uḍḍiyāna,Jālandhara,
Pullīramalaya, and so on.The girls of these places are yoginīsWho are indivisible[15]
from the heroic ones.They all have amorous formsAnd are engaged through the power of mind.


Similar lists are found in other tantras, but fearing verbosity, I shall leave it at this. As
regards these places, they are entirely present internally, within our own body, as shown
in a line in our practice text: ‘The crown of the head is…’. Those places’ channels are
completely transformed into heroic ones and their elements are completely transformed into
yoginīs, each with their own names and in union. This is shown explicitly in the mother tantra
of Cakrasaṃvara, in chapter forty-one:

The Six Yoginīs are in Kulutā,And the Mothers are in the land of Maru.The Lāmās are in the land
of Sindhu,And Ladies of the families are in Nagara.In Lampāka and Saurāṣṭra areThe goddesses
of the families.In Pretapurī is Mahākālā[16]With the ḍākinī Rūpinī. At the Himālayan
mountains and Kāñci,In the regions of Pañcāla and Kaliṅga,The householder goddesses who
uphold yogic discipline,And Sabālikā, are said to be. At Kośala are the female meat-eaters.At
Pretapurī those who eat the great flesh,The vajraḍākinīs are at Sthūleśvara.At Triśakuni
are the Khaṇḍarohās,And also at Pullīramalaya.On the golden mountain there are twenty-one
thousand womenBorn in the Meshachen family. Whatever others there are,They are all part
of the circle of ḍākinīsOf the glorious Heruka—They are the Ladies of the maṇḍalaOf the glorious
Heruka, the great churner. These twenty-four ḍākinīs are pervasively presentIn everything
animate and inanimate of the three worldsAnd in all sentient beings.This samaya of
the ḍākinīsIs to meditate on these emanations.Meditation and so forth, anything that is done,Will
be brought to perfection on this earth.

Thus, as this explains, mantra is accomplished through samaya and aspiration. Once you gain
certainty that the inner twenty-four places have the nature of the chief goddesses, this will
be of immeasurable benefit when it comes to generating inconceivable cities of heroic
ones and ḍākinīs through aspiration. The same text also says:

When a mantrika remains always in meditative equipoiseAnd in the night[17] wears the clothing
of the sky,Whether male or ‘left’,[18]All yoginīs and heroic ones will be pleased. If the
offering of the mudrā of danceIs always offered to the Self-Arisen One,Then everything without
exception is accomplished—You’ll be fully engaged in the worship of the left.[19]

You should know that ‘left’ here relates to gender and refers to the gathering of ḍākinīs, yet
it can also be understood as a mental disposition.[20] Similarly the vast retinues of hundreds
of thousands of ḍākinīs is an inclusive category. The Collected Tantras of the Early
Translation School contains the following:

Hundreds of thousands of great gandharvīs,Hundreds of thousands of great kumbhāṇḍīs,Hundreds
of thousands of great brāhmīs...

There are others too, but I shall not list them all. In a similar vein, regarding the residence
of the wisdom being, other tantras say:

In the heart is Kāñci.
Memory is Himālaya.

Each text thus has its own way of applying the purity. Here, it is not that Samantabhadra and
his consort at the heart are transformed into Vajravārāhī. You need to abandon negative
thoughts such as thinking that Vajravārāhī is in the heart of Samantabhadra and his consort;
and clinging to imputations of such conceptual thoughts as putting one thing inside something
else, or one thing touching something else, or thinking that they would mutually obstruct
one another. Rather, you need to meditate clearly on the completely perfect deities,
who are the radiance of the natural, unfabricated state. In the expanse of light at the
level of the heart of the chief goddess, meditate on the wisdom deity Vajravārāhī in an especially
clear manner and focus your awareness without wavering. Then, imagine light rays
radiating out and gathering in and so on, as described in the Recitation Manual. This is to
be understood from the spoken teachings and has the seal of the extraordinary oral tradition.
Nevertheless, when doing the recitation of the body maṇḍala, meditate that in the heart
of Samantabhadra and consort, within a casket of the union of the sun and moon, is the
life-force syllable a (ཨ) surrounded by the mantra garland.

Palding Jetsün Drung, who has the great fortune of having met the profound and swift path and
is diligently applying the sacred teachings and practices, sent a messenger from afar urging
me to write down some quintessential pith instructions. In the past I made many mistakes
by releasing the seal of these sacred words to numerous individuals who didn’t even practise
and who simply plundered them. Still, I have only ever explained these things with
a pure motivation. Therefore, ḍākinī Dharma custodians, I beg you to consider that and forgive
me. Please clear away all errors that reduce the blessing of this Dharma and obscure
the great accomplishment, transforming them into great purity! This was written at the glorious
Sanctuary of Lotus Light (Pema Ö Ling).[21]

| Translated by Han Kop under the guidance of Tulku Dawa Zangpo of Chorten Gompa and edited
by Adam Pearcey and Libby Snape, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020. This translation
was made possible through the generous support of Áron Csöndes.