Entering the City of Omniscience
An Aspiration Prayer for Actualizing Words of Truth
by Rigdzin Jikme Lingpa

ngödrub gyatsö jungné lama dang chok sum changchub sempa nam la chaktsal shying kyab su chi
o
I offer homage to the source of an ocean of accomplishments: the Lamas and the Three Jewels
and the bodhisattvas. I take refuge in you:
jingyi lab tu sol
Grant your blessings, I pray!
mi ngé kyewa né tserab tamché du daljor chobgyé tsangwé milü rinpoche tob té jetsün lama tsennyi
dang denpé duljar gyurwar shok chik
In all my future lives, may I gain a precious human rebirth complete with all the eighteen freedoms
and endowments, and may I become the student of an authentic master!
ngön to dang ngelek tadak gi jungkhung tö sam gom sum gyi ranggyü tul té gyalwé tenpa rinpoche
jesu lobpar shok chik
Training my mind through study, reflection and meditation, which are the source of higher rebirths
and of definite goodness, may I follow the Buddha’s precious teachings!
chö la jukpé tsawa ngejung dang lo dok nampa shyi gyü la ngam ngam shuk kyi kyé né khorwa tamé
kyi jawa la tsön dong dang mé ob tabur tongwar shok chik
May renunciation, the root of all dharma practice, and the four thoughts which cause renunciation,
arise naturally in my mindstream, and may I see saṃsāra with all its endless activity
as a prison or a fiery pit!
lé dré luwa mepa la yiché nyé né gedik gi lé tramo tsam la yang juk dok jepar shok chik
Gaining confidence in the infallibility of karma, may I strive to undertake even the smallest
good deeds and abandon even the slightest harmful actions!
né drok dudzi kyen ngen lasokpa changchub drubpé barché kyi wang du midrowar könchok sum gyi
kyab oktu tsü dé kyebu sum gyi lam la lobpar shok chik
Not falling prey to adverse circumstances, busy places, distracting companions, or any other
such obstacles on the path to enlightenment, may I take the Three Jewels as my refuge and
train in the graduated path for beings of the three levels of spiritual capacity!
deshek kündü kyi ngowo kadrinchen gyi lama dampa la tetsom dang nyam drok kyi mi ru zungwé lokta
pang té sangye ngö su tongwar shok chik
May I give up all my doubts regarding the master, the embodiment of all the sugatas, and without
slipping into the mistaken view of considering him as an equal, may I see him as an actual
buddha!
dé tu lé tsönjé pé wang shyi go sum minpar jé té mejung dorjé tekpé seng lam la jukpar shok
chik
In this way, may my body, speech and mind be matured through the four empowerments, and so may
I embark upon the path of the wondrous vajra vehicle!
soldeb dang mögü kyi tsam jor lam du long né tsönja dön gyi gonggyü dak la pö té tokpa namkha
dang nyampar shok chik
Through the medium of fervent prayer and devotion, may the wisdom of the lineage be transferred
into me, and may my realization become equal to space!
kyepa mahayogé nyamlen tarchin né nöchü kyilkhor sum du shé shing rigdzin nampa shyi sa la dröpa
gyalsé pema dang bimala tabur gyurwar shok chik
Perfecting the mahāyoga practices of the generation stage, may I come to perceive the whole
universe and beings as the three maṇḍalas and traverse the four levels of a vidyādhara, just
like the buddha’s heirs Padmasambhava and Vimalamitra!
lung anuyogé nyamlen tarchin né khordé kyi dzin tok detong nyisu mepé ngowor sangye té womin
tukpo köpé shyingkham la wang gyurwar shok chik
Perfecting the practice of anuyoga, may all concepts of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa be purified into
the state of indivisible bliss and emptiness, and may I experience the pure realm of Akaniṣṭha!
dzogchen atiyogé nyamlen tarchin né chöchen gyi nangwa chönyi kyi long du zé né shyönnu bumkur
drolwa rigdzin garab dorjé tabur gyurwar shok chik
Perfecting the atiyoga practice of Dzogpachenpo, may all experience dissolve into the expanse
of intrinsic reality, and may I be liberated into the youthful vase body, just like the
vidyādhara Garab Dorje!
dorna dak gi changchub kyi chöpa la labpa né zung té go sum gyi jawa chi gyipa tamché pama semchen
tamché kyi döndu gyurwar shok chik
In short, beginning with the training in the conduct of the bodhisattvas, may whatever I do,
with body, speech or mind, bring nothing but benefit to all sentient beings, my very own
parents!
dü dang nampa tamché du dampé chö mayinpé jikten tün juk gi sampa kechikma tsam yang sem la
mikyewar shok chik
Whatever my situation or circumstance, may I never feel the slightest wish to follow worldly
ways, which run contrary to the Dharma!
galté lé dang bakchak wang tsenpar gyur né chin chi lok gi lo kyé na ang denyi midrubpar shok
chik
Even if, whilst under the sway of karma and habitual patterns, a mistaken thought occurs to
me, may it never be successful!
shyendön du gyur na lü sok dorwa la yang nyam ngamé par shyönnu döndrub tabur gyurwar shok chik
For the sake of others, may I be fearless and ready even to give up my life, just like Prince
Siddhārtha!
dön nyi lhündrub kyi sa la chin né kham sum khorwé gyatso dong né truk nüpa tob chu mijik nam
shyi tsalchen du gyur chik
Having reached the state of spontaneously accomplishing the benefit of self and others, may
I stir the depths of the ocean of saṃsāra’s three worlds by means of the ten strengths and
four fearlessnesses!
döpa dang dralwé mönlam detabu yongsu drubpé tün gyur dzepar gyalwa sé ché nam kyi shyal gyi
shyepa yin no
The buddhas and bodhisattvas have vowed to work towards the accomplishment of unselfish aspiration
prayers such as these.
drangsong denpar mawa nam la chaktsal lo
Homage to the sages who proclaim the truth!
om dharé dharé bhendaré bhendaré soha
oṃ dhare dhare bhandare bhandare svāhā
gewa tob chewar gyur chik
May the strength of virtue increase!
mönlam tutsenpar gyur chik
May the power of aspiration grow!
dikpa dak kyenpar gyur chik
May negativity be swiftly purified!
dzaya dzaya siddhi siddhi pala pala | a a ha sha sa ma | mama ko ling samenta
jaya jaya siddhi siddhi phala phala | 'a a ha sha sa ma | mama koling samanta

Composed by Rigdzin Jikmé Lingpa at the request of Chöden from East Tibet. Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005, updated 2018.