Excellent Intention: A Simple Fasting (Nyungné) Ritual
by Jigme Lingpa

Āryalokeśvarāya!
When those of limited intellect practise the fasting ritual out of devotion the room should
be cleaned and offerings arranged. The practice can be done on the full moon, new moon or
eighth day (of the lunar month). Taking the full moon day as an example, you would begin by
washing at dawn on the fourteenth.
Then offer the maṇḍala before an appropriate support:
sa shyi pö chü juk shing metok tram
The ground is purified with scented water and strewn with flowers.
rirab ling shyi nyidé gyenpa di
It is adorned with Sumeru, the king of mountains, the four quarters of the universe, and the
sun and the moon;
sangye shying la mik té pulwa yi
Thinking of it as the blessed buddha-fields, I offer it.
dro kün namdak shying la chöpar shok
By virtue of this offering, may all beings here and now attain the happiness of that pure land!
The seven branches:
chaktsalwa dang chö ching shakpa dang
I prostrate myself, make offerings, confess,
jesu yi rang kul shying solwa deb
Rejoice, request the teachings and implore you to remain.
gewa chungzé dak gi chi sakpa
Whatever slight virtue I have here amassed,
tamché dzokpé changchub chenpor ngo
I dedicate entirely towards great, perfect awakening!
Then take the bodhisattva vow:
könchok sum la dak kyab chi
I take refuge in the Three Jewels,
dikpa mi gé sosor shak
Confess all my wrongdoing and non-virtuous actions,
drowé gé la jé yi rang
Rejoice in the virtues of beings,
sangye changchub yi kyi zung
And maintain the mind of awakening to buddhahood.
Repeat this three times.
Then there are the preliminaries to taking the vow:
jitar ngön gyi drachom gyi
Just as the arhats of former times,
semchen nam la pen chir dang
To benefit ordinary beings,
changchub chö nam dzok jé chir
And to perfect enlightened qualities,
sojong dzepa deshyindu
Would practise sojong (healing and purification),
dak ming di shyejawé kyang
Just so, I, the one whose name is ___,
dü di né zung sang gi nyin
Shall, from now until sunrise tomorrow,
mashar bar du sojong lang
Take up the practice of sojong.
Repeat this three times.
Taking the actual vow:
deng né sokchö mija shying
From this moment on, I shall not take life,
dzün dang trik dang ma jin len
Nor lie, have sexual intercourse, or take what is not given.
nyepé jungné chang pang shying
I shall give up alcohol, which is the source of all faults,
tri ten to dang dümin zé
Avoid high, luxurious seats, taking food at improper times,
dri dang treng gyen lugar pang
Wearing perfumed scents or ornaments and singing or dancing.
yenlak gyepé dompa la
Through relying on this eightfold vow,
ten né tarpa tobpar shok
May I attain liberation!
Repeat this three times.
Then visualize eleven-faced Avalokiteśvara at your crown and recite the following:
kyön gyi ma gö kudok kar
Unspoilt by defects, your body is white,
dzoksang gyé kyi u la gyen
Your crown is adorned with the perfect buddha,
tukjé chen gyi dro la zik
And with eyes of compassion you gaze on all beings—
chenrezik la chaktsal lo
Avalokiteśvara, to you I pay homage!
chak tong khorlo gyurwé gyalpo tong
Your thousand arms are the thousand universal monarchs,
chen tong kalpa zangpö sangye tong
Your thousand eyes the thousand buddhas of this fortunate age,
gang la gang dul dé la dé tönpa
You who teach each and every one of us according to our needs,
tsünpa chenrezik la chaktsal lo
Noble Avalokiteśvara, to you I pay homage!
Recite this as many times as you can and offer prostrations.
om mani peme hung
Oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ
Imagine that as you recite this uninterruptedly rays of light stream from Noble Avalokiteśvara’s
heart and dissolve into you, purifying your harmful actions and obscurations. If you
know them, it is best to recite the seven-branch prayer and the ‘Po’ praise,1 but even if
you do not, it is fine simply to recite the two stanzas beginning “Unspoilt by defects...”
and offer prostrations as many times you can. The second day is similar to the first, except
that you do not consume even the tiniest amount of food or drink, which, you should know,
is why this is known as a ‘fasting ritual’. At the conclusion, generate the intention
of sharing the merit with all sentient beings.

Thus, this was composed by the one who relies exclusively on faith for the sake of my past mothers,
who are unable to practise the fasting ritual of Bhikṣuṇī Lakṣmī (Gelongma Palmo)
exactly as stated in the texts and might even fail to understand the liturgy, and dispatched
from Pema Ö Ling (The Sanctuary of Lotus Light). May it be of benefit to beings!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.
↑ i.e., Avalokiteśvarastotra by Lakṣmī, so called because almost every line in the Tibetan ends
with the syllable 'po'. https://www.lotsawahouse.org/indian-masters/lakshmi/po-praise-of-avalokiteshvara-chant