The Main Recitation Manual for the Female Practice of the Queen of Great Bliss

from the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse

by Jigme Lingpa

Mother of the victorious ones of the three times together with their heirs,Display of the indestructible
Lady of basic space,Queen of Great Bliss— to you I pay homage!Grant me the two
types of accomplishment!

If you wish to practice the approach and accomplishment phases of the female practice of Yumka,
then go to a special and sacred place where the ḍākinīs gather. Arrange a maṇḍala of coloured
sand or a painted cloth [in the shape of] a half-circle with one door (facing towards
you). In the centre, draw a red dharmodaya[1] marked by a baṃ syllable. Upon that, place
an excellent vessel with alcohol and Dharma medicine[2] and sprinkle it with sindūra. If
you intend to practice for a long time, seal the opening of the vessel with ghee; alternatively,
it is also appropriate to fill it with dry substances such as jewels, cowrie shells,
essences of medicines, and various excellent seeds. On top of that, place a mirror coated
with sindūra, and draw a crossed dharmodaya with a syllable baṃ in its centre using the
menstrual blood of a virgin.[3] Beginning at the front and proceeding in an anti-clockwise
direction, draw one of the syllables jñā na vā rā hī hūṃ at each corner. Then place a crystal
and red canopy on top. Finally, arrange outer and inner offerings all around.

Sit facing west, looking towards the pure realm of Uḍḍiyāna. Begin by taking refuge and arousing
the mind set upon awakening (bodhicitta). Then focus your attention on the meaning of
the generation and completion phases. All appearances are none other than the nature of the
five elements: in the space of the five female buddhas they are primordially awakened.
From a tantra:

Earth and water are Buddhalocanā and Māmakī,Fire and wind are Pāṇḍarāvasinī and Samayatārā,Space
is Dhātviśvarī;The three realms of existence are primordially the realm of awakening.[4]


While keeping in mind how all appearance and existence is naturally perfected as the pure realm
of the ḍākinīs, clearly visualize the appearance aspect of the reflection-like manifestations
of the palace and deity, while keeping the meaning of the words in mind. There is
a tradition that explains the supports as the channels, essences, and wind-energies, and the
supported as the twenty-four sacred places and thirty-two sacred lands, such as Jālandhara
on the crown.[5] The hosts of maṇḍalas of the various tantras are complete within the
space of the deity's body. Those with superior faculties will understand the meaning of this,
those with medium faculties will take aspiration as the path, and those with lesser faculties
will train in clearly visualizing the main and wisdom deity. That is the general explanation.


Now, the essential heart-instructions for the approach phase are as follows. In your heart is
the wisdom deity Vajravārāhī, dark blue in colour. With her right hand she holds a curved
knife aloft in the sky and with her left hand she holds a skull-cup filled with blood at
the level of her heart. Her right leg is bent with the heel pointed towards her bhaga. Her
left leg is extended and tramples on the heart of a corpse that is laid upon a lotus and
sun-disk seat. She is naked and adorned with the five mudrās and six bone ornaments. Behind
her ear is the grunting face of a sow. In her heart is a four-part coil of joy, which turns
and spins anti-clockwise. In its centre is a baṃ syllable surrounded by the twelve seed-syllables
of the root mantra, which resemble coral anointed with oil.

Concentrate on this arrangement and meditate until the body of the deity appears clearly. Once
you have achieved such clear appearance, visualize the mantra-garland radiating with light-rays
that shine out from the crown of your head and invoke the wisdom mind of the Lord
of the family. He is pleased by the offerings of bliss-emptiness. Rays of light radiate from
him and fill the whole of space, making offerings to buddhas residing in their pure realms,
who are also moved and pleased thereby. The light gathers back into you, and you attain
the two kinds of accomplishment. Light radiates out once again,[6] purifying the suffering—together
with its causes—of all six classes of beings in the three realms. Saṃsāra is
transformed, and you should consider that even its name becomes non-existent. Rest your mind
in emptiness.

Then, a stream of nectar flows from the guru, the Lord of the family. As you continue to visualize
yourself clearly as the ḍākinī, the nectar arrives at your crown and you experience
joy; it arrives at your throat and you experience supreme joy; it arrives at your heart bringing
special joy; and when it arrives at your secret place, innate wisdom. Impurities of
your channels, essences, and wind-energies are purified, and you gain special qualities.
In this way, you obtain the four empowerments of all the classes of tantra of the secret
mantra vehicle and purify the four obscurations. This is a very profound point. The process
brings more joy than thousands of feast-gatherings, and entirely fulfils the purpose of
hundreds of thousands of self-initiations and empowerments. Impairments, breakages, negative
actions, and downfalls are purified, and you become a fit vessel for the great accomplishment.
The powerful radiance of awareness expands, and experiences and realization naturally
increase. Since [Vajrayoginī] is the source of all things and the mother of all the victorious
ones, all the maṇḍalas of the various sections of the tantras are complete within
her body. By accomplishing her practice, all auspicious interdependent circumstances of the
profound and swift path of secret mantra will come together.

As for the number of recitations: in order to be able to perform the activities, recite a hundred
thousand for each syllable.[7] For the approach phase, when based on the number of mantras,
you need to multiply that by four.[8] In order to perfect the practice, you need to
practice until signs arise. The signs of the recitation are as the main text[9] says:

Although signs of accomplishment are inconceivable in number,The supreme sign is to possess
an unwavering wisdom mind.

The supreme accomplishment and special realization will dawn in your mind, bringing ordinary
accomplishments, such as the eight great accomplishments, and minor accomplishments, such
as the three gatherings—that is, gathering people during the day, ḍākinīs during the night,
and sustenance at all times.

In the breaks between sessions, perform activities in accordance with the general tradition
of secret mantra. The amendment of the fire offering must be understood from other texts.


In response to the insistent request of Palding Jetsün Drung, I, the vidyādhara Khyentsé Lha,
swiftly wrote this.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2019, with the guidance of Tulku Dawa Zangpo of Chorten Gompa, for
the Longchen Nyingtik Project. Edited by Aaron Coote.