Palchen Düpa Lineage Prayer
by Jigme Lingpa

kunzang yabyum chemchok heruka
Samantabhadra and consort, Mahottara Heruka,
dorjé chö dang khandro lékyi wang
Vajradharma, Ḍākinī Karmendrāṇī,
hungkar shenyen ludrub nyingpo la
Hūṃkāra, Mañjuśrīmitra, Nāgārjunagarbha—
solwa deb so choktün ngödrub tsol
I pray to you: grant the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!

prachenhasti dhanasamskrita
Prabhahasti, Dhanasaṃskṛta,
drimé shenyen guhyatsandra ché
Vimalamitra, great Guyhacandra,1
shyiwé nyingpo pema tötreng la
Śāntigarbha, Lotus Skull-Garland—2
solwa deb so choktün ngödrub tsol
I pray to you: grant the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!

jampal dorjé tsangpé metok sok
Mañjuvajra Trisong Detsen and the rest—
drubchen gyé dang gong da nyengyü kyi
The eight mahāsiddhas,3 and all you root gurus with the three authoritative transmissions
kabab sumden tsawé lama la
Of the mind-direct, sign and oral—
solwa deb so choktün ngödrub tsol
I pray to you: grant the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
Supplementary Verses
gang dé jezung gongter chö kyi dak
Held in his4 compassionate care, custodian of his Dharma mind treasures,
murub tsepö dögar nirmaka
Nirmāṇakāya manifestation of Prince Murub Tsenpo,5
jikme trinlé özer palbar la
Jigme Trinle Özer Palbar—6
solwa deb so choktün ngödrub tsol
I pray to you: grant the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!

dé sé tuwo chökyi lodrö dang
His heir, mighty Chökyi Lodrö,7
bairö namtrul shyenpen tayé ö
Gyalse Shenpen Taye—Vairocana incarnate—
pemé lungten lamé dorjé tsal
And the one prophesied by Padmasambhava: the unsurpassable Dorjé Tsal,8
solwa deb so choktün ngödrub tsol
I pray to you: grant the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!

chok drub gyalpö yangsi chusumpa
Highly accomplished thirteenth incarnation of the king,9
ngotsar kabab dünden dongak ling
You possess the seven wondrous authoritative transmissions—Dongak Lingpa,10
gyü sol kündü tsawé lama la
Embodiment of all lineages and traditions, root guru—
solwa deb so choktün ngödrub tsol
I pray to you: grant the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
The supplements from the verse to the Lord of Siddhas11 onwards were written by the Third Dodrupchen.
kyilkhor nam shyir wang shyi gyü min né
Within the four maṇḍalas, may the four empowerments mature my mind
dribpa shyi jang rigdzin shyi lam lé
And purify the four obscurations, and as I traverse the four vidyādhara levels,
yeshe lamé sa chok kunzang shyal
Inspire me to see Samantabhadra’s face in this very lifetime,
tsé di nyi la tongwar jingyi lob
And so attain the stage of Wisdom Unsurpassed!

Written by Jigme Lingpa. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Han Kop for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020.
↑ Also known as Rombuguhyacandra.↑ Tib. Pema Tötreng, or in other words, Padmasambhava.↑ This
refers to the eight mahāsiddhas of Tibet. According to Mipham Rinpoche, they were Nupchen
Sangye Yeshe, Gyalwa Chokyang, Namkhai Nyingpo, King Trisong Detsen, Yeshe Tsogyal, Palgyi
Yeshe, Langchen Palgyi Senge and Vairotsana. ↑ I.e., Jigme Lingpa↑ One of the sons of King
Trisong Detsen↑ I.e., the First Dodrupchen.↑ I.e., Dola Jigme Kalzang↑ I.e., Khenpo Pema
Vajra↑ I.e., King Trisong Detsen↑ Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo↑ Dodrupchen Jigme Trinle Özer