Rain of Accomplishments
A Concise Fulfilment Practice for the Female Awareness-Holder
by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa

hung, döné tongchen khaying long
Hūṃ. In primordial great emptiness, the expanse of space,
yong shar sishyi nyam dalwa
All that arises, as vast as existence and peace,
chöpé ngöpor rab jang té
Is purified as the substances of offering,
dzemé namkhé dzö du gyur
To become an inexhaustible sky-treasury.

om ah hung
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ.
dechen dorjé rangshyin dang
Within the nature of indestructible great bliss
khordé chö kur né dakpar
And the dharmakāya purity of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
kangja kong jé yuldral yang
There are neither objects nor agents of fulfilment.
tral nang drima jangpé chir
Yet in order to purify the stains of temporary appearances:

gyumé chotrul jishyin du
Just as in a magical illusion,
nangsi dak nyam chenpö shying
The realm of the great purity and equality of appearance and existence,
tok tsok sishyi kyendro chü
And its contents, all thoughts and living beings in existence and peace,
döné tsok shying yinpa la
Have always been the field of accumulation.

sheshyin yeshe gyé tab ching
Knowing this, the seal of wisdom is imprinted
rangjung ying su tsombur trik
And the maṇḍalas of deities are arranged in naturally arisen space.

hung, zacha tungwé döyön tsok
Hūṃ. The heaps of sensual delights of food and drink,
wang ngé longchö nang gi tsok
The enjoyments of the five senses, are the inner feast.
döyön lha mö khaying gang
The goddesses of sensual delights fill the sky;
ga shyi yeshe sangwé tsok
The wisdom of the four joys is the secret feast.
damtsik mejung gyepé dzé
These are the wondrous, delightful samaya substances!

hung, gong da nyengyü drukden dang
Hūṃ. All you root gurus of the six or nine types of lineage,1
guden tsawé lama sok
Such as the mind-direct, sign and oral transmissions,
gyüdé shyi druk yidam gyi
And all you chosen deities2 of the maṇḍalas of the four or six classes of tantra—
kyilkhor yongdzok tukdam kang
May your wishes be fulfilled!

womin khachö né dang yul
All you oceanic ḍākinīs of wisdom and activity,
sachö lasok shyingkham né
Abiding in The Unsurpassed, celestial pure realms and sacred lands,
shyukpé khandro gyatso dang
And in terrestrial pure realms—
yeshe lé drub tukdam kang
May your wishes be fulfilled!

lhenkyé shying kyé ngak kyepé
All you innate, field-born and mantra-born ḍākinīs,
durtrö gyé yul nyishu dang
Abiding in the eight charnel grounds, twenty places,
né chen sumchu tsa dün na
And thirty-seven great lands—
shyukpé khandrö tukdam kang
May your wishes be fulfilled!

né dang nyené shying dang nyé
All you ḍākinīs abiding in primary and peripheral lands and fields,
tsendho nyé tsen du nyé du
The chandoha and upacchandoha, major and minor meeting places,
durtrö nyewé trö né dang
Charnel grounds and related funeral areas,
tung chö nyé tung neyul na
And primary and secondary abodes3—
shyukpé khandrö tuk dam kang
May your wishes be fulfilled!

nangsi yangdak khandrö ling
Appearance and existence, in reality, are ḍākinī lands;
pung kham khandro jewé drong
Aggregates and elements cities to ḍākinīs by their millions.
den sum yangdak kyilkhor lha
The three seats, in reality, are the deities of the maṇḍala.
ro chik chökü long du kang
May your wishes be fulfilled within the expanse of singular dharmakāya.

zakmé dütsi langpa lé
Out of the vapour of inexhaustible ambrosia
yong shar chödzé kham gangwa
Arise offering substances which fill the universe,
bapü khung né rab tim shying
And, dissolving into your pores, bring perfect satisfaction.
gyé tsim nyamchak kang gyur chik
May your delight heal all impairments and breakages!

sang chok dorjé zek ma lé
Through drops from the supremely secret vajra,
chakpé dangden pawö rik
The heroic ones, flush with passionate desire,
drangmé gawé nyam kyi khyü
Embrace you in an experience of untold pleasure—
detong ga shyi rolpé kang
May the play of blissful emptiness and fourfold joy bring fulfilment.

damtsik tsa tung ying su shak
I confess the root downfalls of samaya in basic space.
khandro shukdro shazé tsok
All you hosts of ḍākinīs, forceful and flesh-eating spirits,
malü khor dang chepa nam
Together with your entire retinue,
nyé dral sha trak sok uk kyi
Free us from our mistakes, and through this offering of flesh, blood and life-supporting breath,
gyé kang si tsor drolwar dzö
In your delight and fulfilment, liberate us from this ocean of existence!

nöchü kuntuzangmo yi
Environment and beings arise as Samantabhadrā’s display,
roltsal yong shar chok men drön
Within which there are higher and lower guests,
rik druk gek rik lenchak ché
Including the six classes, obstructing forces, and pursuers of karmic debt—
tongnyi tadral rolpé kang
May the play of emptiness beyond extremes bring fulfilment.

chok tün ngödrub bemé tsol
Effortlessly bestow supreme and ordinary attainments!
kyé dang tserab küntu dak
In all my births and lives to come may I never be apart
ma chik khandrö tsok ché dang
From the one true mother and her hosts of ḍākinīs,
mindral sang ngak nö rung shying
And may I be a proper vessel for the Secret Mantra.

sang chö tulshyuk rolpé chok
May I enact the supreme play of yogic discipline’s secret conduct,
dön nyi tarchin jalü drub
Perfect the twofold aim, and accomplish the rainbow body.
namkün chokden naljormé
May I realize in this very life the level of the yoginī,
gopang tsé dir ngön drub shok
Who is endowed with the supreme of all qualities!

Lama Pema expressed a need for a fulfilment ritespecifically for the practice of the Female
Awareness-Holderand persistently requested me to write one, so to avoid refusing his request,I,
someone who takes aspiration towards these Dharma teachings as the path,and who is without
any sectarian bias, a disciple of numerous learned and accomplished holy beings,the
lowly Jigme Lingpa,spontaneously wrote this down. May it bring universal virtue!
Sarva maṅgalaṃ!

| Translated by Han Kop with the kind assistance of Tulku Dawa Zangpo and Khenpo Sonam Tsewang,
and reviewed by Josh Capitanio, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020.
↑ The six lineages (drug ldan brgyud pa) of the Nyingma tradition are: 1) the mind-direct lineage
of the victorious ones (rgyal ba dgongs), 2) the sign lineage of the vidyādharas (rig
'dzin brda), 3) the aural lineage of realized beings (gang zag snyan), 4) the ḍākinī’s seal
of entrustment lineage (mkha' 'gro gtad rgya), 5) the lineage empowered by aspiration
(smon lam dbang bskur), 6) the lineage of prophetically declared succession (bka' bab lung
bstan).↑ Tib. yidam.↑ These are twelve kinds of pilgrimage sites mentioned in the  Cakrasaṃvara
cycle. In Sanskrit these are pīṭha (gnas), upapīṭha (nye ba'i gnas), kṣetra (zhing),
upakṣetra (nye ba'i zhing), chandoha (tsha ndho ha), upachandoha (nye ba'i tsha ndho ha),
melāpaka ('du), upamelāpaka (nye ba'i 'du), veśma (sometimes pīlava, 'thung spyod), upaveśma
(sometimes upapīlava, 'thung spyod), śmaśāna (dur 'khrod), and upaśmaśāna (nye ba'i dur
'khrod).