The Single Oceanic Wisdom
An Aspiration to Recognise the Bardos
by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa

dü sum sangye tamché kyi
Precious guru, embodiment of all the buddhas
daknyi lama rinpoche
Throughout the three times,
gönmé dak la tukjé zik
Turn your compassionate gaze towards me,
marik tibpö nönpa dak
For I am without refuge and beset by deep-seated confusion.
khor tsé tokma mepa né
Throughout time without beginning, I have been oppressed
lé nyön dikpé zil gyi nön
By karma, destructive emotions and negative deeds,
lama nyé shing pün la trö
I have harboured contempt for the guru and anger toward vajra siblings,
damtsik dompé né kün yang
And as a result, have fallen into the abyss of destructive behaviour
nyechö chenpö yangsar lhung
And ruined all my vows and samaya commitments.
ma tsal shyindu nongpa kün
Now, filled with intense remorse, I openly confess all my misdeeds,
dering nonggyö drakpö shak
Without holding anything back.
ngönché khyé kyi ka lé dé
Previously I didn’t heed your commands,
deté diktung majangwar
Nor did I purify destructive actions and downfalls.
jikten parol song gyur na
Thus, when I depart this world,
nyal mé zö ké ngepar sek
I’ll surely be consumed in the unbearable fires of hell.
detsé daknyi dor pö dam
When that time comes, will you abandon me?

tokta mepé trul shyi ni
The ground of confusion is without beginning or end
lung ma ten gyi chönyi né
As, from the neutral state of suchness,
künjung marik dön chen dang
The great demon of confusion, the source of all ills,
drokpé rangshyin kyené kyi
Arises in tandem with birth – the natural bardo of life.
bardor chöden daljor lü
Having won a life of leisure and fortune,
tob né lama nyé jé ching
May I please the guru, and,
tö sam gompé sherab la
With wisdom arisen through study, contemplation and meditation,
ten né ngejung changchub sem
Cultivate renunciation and bodhicitta,
chin druk lam chok nyenpar shok
And practice the supreme path of the six perfect actions.

dü kyi nyin té drowa la
In time, I’ll have to pass on
chi ké bardo shyeja té
To the so-called bardo of dying.
detsé chi kyen ngenpa dang
Then may I not suffer
né chö drakpo minjung shying
A painful, sudden or violent death,
ying dang rigpa sewa yi
But by unifying basic space and awareness,
ösal bub juk ngöngyur né
Enter the sphere of luminosity
dömé shyi la drolwar shok
And be freed within the primordial ground.

galté gompé tob chung na
However, should my familiarity prove weak,
go gyé kak né tsang buk yé
May I close the eight gateways, open the aperture of brahma,
namshé lung shyön dampa yi
And, through familiarity with the instruction
drong po drong juk la ten né
On the ejection of consciousness riding the subtle wind,
khachö rigdzin né tob shok
Take birth in Khecara, celestial abode of the vidyādharas.

detar changchub sempa yi
Yet if I do not actualise the bodhisattvas’
po luk ngön du ma gyur na
Transference of consciousness in this way,
sa la sa tim dang mi nü
The earth element will dissolve into itself, and I’ll be unable to rise;
chu la chu tim kha nar chu
The water element will dissolve into itself, and mucus will leak from my nose and saliva from
my mouth;
mé la mé tim kha na kam
The fire element will dissolve into itself, and my mouth and nose will dry up;
lung tim uk ngar yenlak tra
And, when the wind element dissolves, my breath will falter, and my limbs weaken,
mik trin gyen dok duwa dang
My vision will cloud over, and my eyes roll upward.
mikgyu mekhyer marmé bar
[Without the support of the elements], the five subtle energies will dissipate
lung nga dröpé jelé kyi
And cause visions of smoke, mirages, fireflies and a bright lamp to appear in turn.
khyabja jungwé kham nga dang
When the five elements and fresh wisdom-bindus,
khyabjé yeshe tiklé chi
Which hitherto pervaded them,
gyab gyé yul nga yishé la
Are about to separate
timpar chok tsé dinang la
And the five sense consciousnesses dissolve into mind,
shyen chak dungwa mi kyé shying
May I have no attachment to the appearances of this spent life
lamé damngak drenpar shok
And recall the instructions of my Guru.

rakpa tsa tik lung sum gyi
Next, as a result of the separation
tsokpa gyepé tendrel lé
Of the gross channels, drops and subtle winds,
trawa nang ché tob sum gyi
The subtle experiences of appearance, increase and attainment will arise.
tim tsul kar cha tur bab té
With the descent of the white element,
nyingtob lé jung döchak kyi
Thoughts related to desire,
tokpa gak dang lhenchikpar
Which arise from ‘strength of the heart’ (bliss),1 will cease.
namshé nangwa la timpé
Simultaneously, consciousness will dissolve into ‘appearance’,
tön nam da ö kyi long té
And as a vision like a moonlit autumn sky appears,
karlam rang ngo shepar shok
May I recognise this whiteness to be my nature.

deshyin mar cha gyendu dok
Similarly, with the ascent of the red element,
dul lé jungwé shyedang gak
Thoughts related to aggression, which arise from ‘dust’ (suffering), will cease.
nangwa chepa la timpé
As ‘appearance’ dissolves into ‘increase’
karkhung nyi shyur gyi long té
Producing a vision of redness like sunbeams streaming through a skylight,
marlam rang ngo shepar shok
May I recognise this to be my nature.

khu dul nyinggar trepa lé
When the white and red drops2 meet at my heart,
münchen lé jung timuk gak
Thoughts related to confusion, which arise from ‘darkness’ (ignorance), will cease.
chepa nyertob la timpé
As 'increase’ dissolves into ‘near-attainment’,
tön nam mak gi longwa té
A vision of blackness like a dark autumn sky will dawn,
naklam shar né gyalwa la
And I will likely faint.
chok tsé drenpé drönmé yi
Then may I employ the lamp of recollection,
nyertob ösal la dré né
And, by merging near-attainment with natural luminosity,
dömé ying su sangye shok
Awaken within the primordial expanse.

galté drenpé tob shyenpé
If, as the force of my recollection is weak,
gyal té semmé kab gyur na
I lose conscious and experience an absence of thought,
künshyi chöying la sé né
May the ālaya (basis of all) awaken as dharmadhātu,
dang sal tokpa mepa yi
Clear, lucid, and free of all conceptualization,
chiwa ösal ngöngyur shok
And may I actualise the luminosity of death.

detar chökü sewa yi
If I cannot merge with the dharmakāya
dömé nang ying ma zin na
And seize the primordial expanse within,
shintu trawé lungsem cha
The extremely subtle energy-mind
lukdok nyewar tobpar lé
Will develop in reverse from near-attainment
chepé nangwa chönyi kyi
To increase and appearance, and
bardo shyi ying kadak long
As the primordially pure expanse of the basal dhātu,
trekchö tawé ngöngyur ching
The bardo of dharmatā, dawns,
shyi nang yinluk ösal ni
May I realise it through the view of Trekchö.
nangwa tamché ö nga ru
As the natural luminosity of the ground,
zawok trampa tar shar tsé
All appearances will manifest as five-coloured light, like unfurled brocade.
tögal gompé nyé gyu lé
Then, through my familiarity with Tögal,
rangnang rangshyin mepar shé
May I recognise them as my own manifestation – without self-nature –
chönyi chikchar zepar shok
So that they are instantly exhausted within suchness.

galté ösal zungjuk la
Yet, should luminosity dissolve into union,
tim né rik gyé nangwa shar
The appearances of the hundred deities will dawn,
dra yi jik shing zer gyi ngang
With terrifying sounds and startling brilliance.
ku yi nangwé trak gyur na
If these appearances strike me with terror,
sengé sob tar tsang rik né
May I recall that they are like nothing more than stuffed lions
bak mi tsawé deng tob shok
And thereby gain unshakeable confidence.

samten gyi ni shyak nga la
For five days of meditative absorption,
gyalwa rik ngé shyal tong tsé
As I behold the faces of the buddhas of the five families,
ku dang rang ö drelwa yi
May I connect them with my own natural radiance
rigpa ösal la juk dang
And allow awareness to enter into luminosity.
ku yang rang la timpa yi
Then, once the forms are absorbed into me,
ösal rigpa la juk tsé
When luminosity dissolves into awareness,
ma pang bu juk tar drol shok
May I be liberated like a child leaping into its mother’s lap.

deshyin zungjuk yeshe la
Similarly, when union dissolves into wisdom,
timpé ö nang tiklé chen
And luminosity appears as radiant spheres (bindu) –
yeshe shyi jor nangwa ni
The appearances of fourfold wisdom,
dorjé sempé khongseng lam
The inner path of Vajrasattva –
nang tsé rigpa rang sa zin
May I seize the very ground of awareness.

yeshe lhündrub la timpé
As wisdom dissolves into spontaneous presence,
ku dang yeshe tukjé ö
Kāyas, wisdoms, compassion, lights,
ta drol nyimé dak ma dak
Freedom from extremes, non-duality, purity, and impurity
lhündrub yeshe chenpö go
Appear as the eight great gateways of spontaneous wisdom.
gyé du shar yang khordé kyi
As entrance to, or withdrawal from, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa
jukdok rigpé rang tsal du
Is simply the natural expression of awareness,
sharwa shyi lé mayöpé
May I gain confidence in the great display of the ground,
shyi nang chenpor yiché shok
In which nothing ever wavers from the ground itself.

deyang kyerim la gom na
Moreover, through familiarity with the creation phase,
lungsem tsam gyi lü denyi
May the subtle body of wind and mind
tsenpé dzokpé yidam gyi
Arise through the five aspects of complete enlightenment3
lha kur ngönjang ngé chubpa
As the kāya of the yidam deity, complete with marks and signs,
bardor longkü sewa yi
And thus by merging with the saṃbhogakāya within the bardo,
gyumé ku ru dangwar shok
May I arise in an illusory kāya.

gangshyik möpé chö nam kyang
May those who take devotion as their practice
jedren nga dang ngönshé druk
Find relief in the five recollections,4 six clairvoyances,5
mi jé zung kyi ukjin né
And unfailing powers of mnemonic retention,
lama dren né jedzin shok
And, having brought the guru to mind, come under his protection.

yidam dren né shyal tong shying
May we recall and behold the face of the yidam deity.
tawa dang ni samten dang
And may we recollect the view, meditation,
kyené mengak drenpar shok
Places of rebirth, and the pith instructions.

deshyin ngön né shepa dang
Similarly, may I remember past lives,
chipo dang ni kyewa shé
View death and transmigration and future birth,
parol gyi ni sem shé dang
Know the minds of others,
nangwa kokgyur shepa dang
And be aware of hidden phenomena.
rik druk né rik tong shying shé
May I see the beings of the six classes in their various realms,
wangpo namdak ngönshé dang
Gain pure sensory perception and clairvoyance,
ngönché tö so chok gi tsön
And unfailingly recall and retain
chö kyi namdrang tsemepa
All the boundless forms of Dharma,
gyü la charwé mi jé zung
Represented by the teachings I’ve already heard.
tob tsé ngepar drolwé né
Crucially, at this time, may I recognise
tongnyi trödral kadak gi
The empty, primordially pure and unelaborate nature
rigpa cher tong rang tok tu
Of awareness nakedly, just as it is,
ngoshé takchö deng tob shok
Decide upon it and gain confidence.

dorna chönyi barma dö
In essence, there is no limit to how the bardo
nampar ché na tamé kyang
Of dharmatā might be investigated,
chö khen nyi la tsur tak na
But by turning the investigation upon the investigator,
gangdu’ang drubpa mepa la
It is clear that there is nothing whatsoever that is real,
mé do nyampa’ang rang drolwa
And even the idea of non-existence disappears by itself.
di ni dömé drol sa té
This is the site of primordial liberation.
shyönnu bumpé ku tob né
Having attained the ‘youthful kāya in a vase’,
lhündrub tsal lé trulpa lé
May I emanate from its spontaneous, creative power
dro dön khorwa dongtruk shok
To dredge the depths of saṃsāra for the benefit of all.

galté sipa bardo la
Yet, if I should wander into the bardo of becoming,
kha khyam ming shyi düpachen
I will become an aggregate of the four ‘names’ – 6
wangpo kün tsang yi kyi lü
With all senses intact and a body of mental energy.
shiwar ngoshé drenpa sal
I’ll clearly recall my death and know that I’ve passed on,
namdrol sa dang kyené la
Blown about like a feather borne upon the wind,
tokpé ja dro lung khyer tar
Barred only from the place of liberation and site of rebirth.
lé lung jé dro nyamtak ching
I’ll follow the winds of karma, suffer exhaustion,
dré ngang kyi dung dün tsen ré
And, in terror, endure the torments of my death
tsam su chiwé dukngal gyi
Repeatedly, at the end of each and every week,
tsorwa nyamnyong kyené tsol
As, all the while, I seek a place to take rebirth.
detsé rangshyin trulpé shying
At this time, through having familiarised myself
ngönpar ga dang palden dang
With Manifest Joy, The Glorious,
pema tsek dang lerab drub
Stacked Lotuses, Perfect Deeds Accomplished,
ü chok meri barwa té
And Blazing Mountain in the centre –
namdrol uk chen jinpa ngé
The five naturally emanated pure realms,
dak shying yi la gom jé né
Which grant the wondrous relief of total liberation,
dön mi zawar dröpar shok
May I proceed there without the slightest hesitation.

galté rigpé tsal wang gi
If I’m not ripened by empowerment into the dynamic energy
ma min denpa ma tong na
Of intrinsic awareness and haven’t seen the truth,
sosö né rik ngöngyur ram
The indications of my future birth will manifest:
nyalwa dongdum yidak du
I’ll look downwards at a tree stump for the hells
gowo tur ta jolsong trak
Or at smoke for the land of hungry spirits.
lhamin khachar go yang tré
I’ll look ahead and perceive blood as an animal, or rain and snow as a titan.
lhami kar shying gyendu dreng
I’ll look up and perceive whiteness as a god or a human being –
dö lha yul la ga dung dang
And if a god of the desire realm, I’ll delight in objects;
zuk kham ö la zukmé ni
If a god of the form realm, I’ll revel in light;
chiyang mepé tong ché la
And if a god of the formless realm, I’ll relish
ga dung char shying khyepardu
Open space that is devoid of anything at all.
pamé du trö tongwé tsé
Then, especially upon seeing the union of my future parents,
chakdang denmé jongwa’am
Through having trained in the insubstantiality of attachment and aversion,
sumpé wangdön nyamnyong shying
Or experienced the meaning of the third empowerment,
kyené shyi yi jang shyi dang
And through purifying the four ways of taking birth
jongjé gompé kyerim gyi
Based on familiarity with mantric conduct,
ngak la chöpé tenchen du
The cleansing agent of creation phase yoga,
kyewa tulkü sewa yi
May I blend my birth with the nirmāṇakāya,
nying tsamjorwé tu tob shok
And thus gain the power to reconnect with my practice.7

min jé wang dang drol jé tri
If I cannot integrate the empowerments that ripen,
sungja damtsik tobja dré
Instructions that liberate, samaya that is to be kept
nampa shyi ru sewa dang
And result to be obtained, and am unfamiliar
go sum lha ngak chönyi du
With the key points of transference of the three doors8
powé né la ma gom na
As deity, mantra and suchness,
jung shyi lung gi jelé kyi
The energies of the four elements will function
shintu jikpé dra shyi dang
To produce four types of terrifying sound,9
duk sum lé kyé chong rong sum
The three poisons will yield three forms of abyss,10
bakchak lé kyé shemé zuk
Negative habits will adopt the shapes of executioners,
mé chu chenzen jikpé tsok
And there will be fires, waters and fearsome beasts.
könchok sum la kyamdro dang
Then may I find solace by taking refuge in the three rare and sublime ones
gewé ram dé ukjin shok
And through the force of previously accumulated virtue.

daljor tsangwé lü ten gyi
May I select an excellent entrance to future rebirth,
ngal go zangpo dampa dang
A physical form complete with the freedoms and advantages,
mönlam dakpé tsam jar né
And by combining this with pure prayers of aspiration,
tori yönten dünden gyi
May I obtain a form possessing the seven qualities of the higher realms,11
ten la lama nyé jé né
Use it to please the guru,
tsulshyin chöpé rangwang dang
Have the freedom to practice the Dharma perfectly,
chi sung ka shyin drubpa yi
And through following instructions to the letter,
tuk yi chik tu drepar shok
Merge my own mind with the guru’s wisdom!

By the vidyādhara Jigme Lingpa.

| Translated by Sean Price, 2021.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "bar do'i smon lam dgongs gcig rgya mtsho", in klong chen snying
thig rtsa pod. 5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen Publications,
1994. Vol. 2: 469–479.

Version: 1.2-20210809
↑ The Tibetan text includes a footnote identifying strength of the heart as bliss, dust as suffering
and darkness as ignorance. According to the Saṃkhya these are three material qualities
(yon tan gsum, triguṇa): 1. lightness (snying stobs, sattva), 2. energy/motility (rdul,
rajas), and 3. darkness (mun pa, tamas).↑ Khu rdul. These are the aforementioned white
and red elements – the white element (semen) of the father and red element (ovum) of the
mother.↑ The five aspects of complete enlightenment (mngon byang lnga) are: 1) the ground
of emptiness, 2) the seat of lotus and moon disc, 3) mind as a hand implement, 4. speech as
the seed-syllable, and 5) the kāya as perfection. ↑ The five recollections (rjes dran lnga),
as found in the pith instructions of the Kadampas, are to recall: 1)  the guru as the
embodiment of all refuges, 2) the body as that of the yidam, 3) speech as mantra, 4) sentient
beings as having been one's parents, and 5) emptiness as the nature of mind.↑ The six
clairvoyances (mngon shes drug) are 1) the capacity to perform miracles, 2) divine sight,
3) divine hearing, 4) recollection of former lives, 5) cognition of the minds of others,
and 6) cognition of the exhaustion of defilements.↑ The bardo being is composed of four of
the five aggregates (feeling, perception, formations and consciousness) but lacks the first,
form, as their body is made up of mental energy.↑ This refers to the practice which is
likened to the repair of an irrigation pipe or length of guttering. In the example the pipe
has broken and the flow of water interrupted. Once the pipe is repaired the flow may resume.
A breakage or interruption to the flow of practice, death, has occurred, and the instruction
here is for taking a good birth (the repair) so the flow of practice may resume.↑
The three gateways of activity: body, speech and mind.↑ The sounds of mountains crumbling,
oceans surging, forests burning and apocalyptic gales.↑ A chasm of vivid whiteness that
arises from aversion, one of vivid redness that arises from attachment, and one of total blackness
that arises from delusion.↑ To be born with longevity, health, attractive form, fortune,
a good family, wealth, and intelligence.