The Vidyādhara Assembly (Rigdzin Düpa), the Inner Practice from the Heart-Essence of the Vast
Expanse
revealed by Jigme Lingpa

Vajraguru Vidyādharaye!
To perform the inner practice of the Vidyādhara Assembly, go to a secluded and joyful place,
somewhere with red features in the landscape and with orchards, forests, and flowers in bloom.
In such an excellent place that is auspicious and pleasing, arrange the materials for
offerings and decorations for the maṇḍala as desired. Relax and be seated on a comfortable
seat. Then, with the profound interdependent circumstance of the preliminaries, the main
part and the conclusion all complete, carry out the practice. Samaya.
I. The Preliminary Activities
There are seven parts.
1. Taking Refuge
Visualize the field of merit in the space in front of you and take refuge with faith and total
trust.
namo, dak dang tayé semchen kün
Namo! I and all infinite sentient beings
chok sum ngowo lama dang
Take refuge in the guru, the essence of the Three Jewels,
rigdzin gyatsö kyilkhor la
And the maṇḍala of the ocean of vidyādharas,
nying né depé kyab su chi
With devotion and from the depths of our hearts!
Three times
2. Generating the Mind Set Upon Awakening
ho, rigdzin kyilkhor dir shyuk né
Hoḥ! Having entered this maṇḍala of the vidyādharas,
pama dro druk semchen kün
So that I might liberate, with immeasurable compassion,
tsemé nyingjé drolwé chir
All beings of the six realms, my very own parents,
mönjuk döndam changsem kyé
I generate the awakening mind, relative—in aspiration and action—and absolute!
Three times
3. Gathering the Accumulations
ho, chu lé chubur jishyin du
Hoḥ! To the deities who manifest, like bubbles arising from water,
yeshe ying lé trulpé lhar
Out of the all-pervading space of wisdom:
ngönsum rigpé chaktsal lo
With direct perception of awareness, I prostrate;
nyam nang gongpel chöpar bul
The increase of visionary experience, I present as offering;
rigpa tsepeb ngang du shak
In the full measure of awareness, I confess;
chönyi zé la jé yi rang
In the exhaustion of phenomenal reality, I rejoice;
po chen long né chökhor kor
From the expanse of ‘great transference’, turn the wheel of Dharma, I implore you.
jalü chenpor shyuk soldeb
Remain in the great rainbow body, I pray.
gé tsok shyönnu bumkur ngo
All accumulated merit I dedicate toward the youthful vase body.
4. Giving the Command to Obstructing Forces
hrih, nöchü trulpé kyilkhor dir
Hrīḥ! In this emanated maṇḍala of the environment and beings,
lakta barchö dü kyi rik
All you malicious and obstructing demonic forces
torma long la shyendu deng
Take this torma1 offering and go elsewhere!
ka lé da na dorjé shyom
Should you dare disobey this command, you’ll be annihilated by the vajra!
Harass them with the mantra of the four hūṃs and blessed substances
5. Visualization of the Protective Tent
hrih, nangsi dakpa rabjam la
Hrīḥ! In the infinite purity of appearance and existence,
gek dang barchö ming yangmé
Even the names of negative forces and obstacles do not exist.
lobur namtok trulpé dön
Yet to prevent harmful influences, the delusions of fleeting thoughts,
chöying ngang du tsam ché do
I set the boundary in the state of dharmadhātu.
6. Invocation of Blessings and Wisdom
hung, trödral chökü podrang né
Hūṃ! From the dharmakāya palace of sheer simplicity,
dangpö sangye kuntuzang
Primordial Buddha Samantabhadra,
rik nga yabyum trulkhor ché
Buddhas of the five families with your consorts and emanated retinue—
gonggyü lamé jin chen pob
Gurus of the mind-direct transmission, shower down your blessings!

gyutrul dorjé podrang né
From the vajra palace of illusory display,
garab jampal shenyen dang
Garab Dorje, Mañjuśrīmitra,
shri seng jnanasutra sok
Śrī Siṃha, Jñānasūtra and the rest—
dagyü lamé jin chen pob
Gurus of the sign transmission, shower down your blessings!

drodul trulpé podrang né
From the nirmāṇakāya palace of disciplining beings,
rigdzin gyé dang pema jung
The eight vidyādharas and the Lotus-Born,
jebang nyishu tsa nga sok
King and subjects—the twenty-five disciples—and the rest,
nyengyü lamé jin chen pob
Gurus of the oral transmission, shower down your blessings!

kyilkhor di la trak chik tön
Cause this maṇḍala to shine in vivid splendour!
drubdzé di la shyak chik kyil
Make the accomplishment substances glisten and sparkle!
lü ngak yi la dechen por
Kindle great bliss in our body, speech and mind!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us attainments,2 ordinary and supreme!
om ah hung | vidyadhara é ara li pem pem | hung hung hung | hung hung hung | hung hung hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ | vidyādhara e ārali pheṃ pheṃ | hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ | hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ | hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ ||
Recite this and play the musical instruments vigorously.
7. Blessing the Offerings
om ah hung, nangsi tamché chöpé trin
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! Offering clouds of all that appears and exists
yeshe dütsir jinlab pé
Are blessed as wisdom amṛta,
chi nang sangwé chödzé kün
So that all outer, inner and secret offerings
kunzang namtrul chenpor gyur
Become Samantabhadra’s vast, miraculous display.
Then bless the offerings by reciting the following three times:
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda | sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-sukha
pūjā āḥ hūṃ
II. The Main Part
This has seven parts.
1. The Visualization
The palace and deities are visualized within a state free from conceptual elaboration.
hung, machö rigpa tong sal ngang
Hūṃ! In the unaltered state of awareness, empty yet luminous,
lhaktong nangché tendrel kün
Arises a clear vision3 of all that appears, all interdependent phenomena.
lhündrub dakpa rabjam kyi
Spontaneously present and infinitely pure—
kyilkhor chenpor lhün dzokpé
The great maṇḍala, spontaneously complete:

podrang shyalmé nyamgawa
The delightful palace, beyond measure,
dru shyi go shyi tsennyi den
Is square, with four doors and all other characteristics;
da dön tak sum yongdzokpé
Its symbols, meanings and significance all perfectly complete.
chinang zangtal chenpö ü
Without outside or inside, it is vast, unimpeded clarity.

natsok pema nyidé teng
In its centre, upon a multicoloured lotus, sun and moon, is a Hūṃ,
hung lé kechik dren dzok su
Out of which, perfect in the very moment of envisioning,
daknyi sangye kün gyi ngö
I arise as the actual presence of all the buddhas—
nangsi zilnön pema jung
The Lotus-Born ‘Prevailing Over All That Appears and Exists’.

shyal chik chak nyi kar mar dang
He has one face and two hands, and is white tinged with red.
tek sum dzokpé datak su
As a sign of complete mastery over the three vehicles,
pökha chögö ber dung nab
He wears monastic robes, gown and cape.
chak yé dorjé tsé nga dik
His right hand wields a five-spoked vajra in the threatening mudrā,

yönpé bhenda tsebum nam
His left holds a skull-cup containing the long-life vase.
chenkhung yön na lhacham dzé
Cradled in his left arm is the beautiful goddess, Mandāravā.
u la pemé nyen shyusol
On his head he wears the lotus hat,
gyalpo rolpé tab su gying
And he is seated in the graceful posture of royal poise.

utsuk jazer tiklé long
Above his head, amidst a shimmering aura of spheres of rainbow light,
garab dorjé longkü ché
Sits Garab Dorje with his saṃbhogakāya adornments,
karsal dordril tukkar nol
Brilliant white, holding vajra and bell across his heart,
dé yi u tsuk tokmé gön
Above his head is the primordial protector

kunzang yabyum namkhé dok
Samantabhadra, sky-coloured, with his consort.
chi khor pema dab gyé teng
Around them, on each of the eight lotus petals,
ö ngé tiklé dumkor ü
In the midst of five-coloured spheres of light,
palchen drubpé rigdzin gyé
Are the eight vidyādharas, adepts of the Awesome Ones,

kün kyang herukapé ché
All in heruka costume,
chak nyi daru drilbu trol
And playing ḍamaru and bell in their two hands.
tangtab chakgya gar gyi rol
In dancing posture, they are united with their consorts.
chok shyi chok dok tsam shyi ting
Those in the cardinal directions are coloured accordingly; those in intermediate directions
are dark blue.

drubdé gyé kyi ngowor sal
They have the nature of the deities of the eight sādhana sections.
bartsam gya bö rigdzin dang
All around are the vidyādharas of India and Tibet,
trulpé jebang nyishu nga
And the twenty-five incarnations—the king and subjects—
namgyur chaluk mangé shing
In their various appearances and garments,

dorjé gartab chiryang gyur
Performing vajra dances.
tengchok gyüdé shyi druk gi
Above are the chosen deities,4 heroic ones and ḍākinīs,
yidam pawo khandrö tsok
Of the four or six classes of tantra—
til gyi gongbu tabur shyuk
All assembled like a mass of sesame seeds.

chi khyam palgön dünchu dang
On the outer walkway are the seventy-five glorious lords,
wangchuk nyishu tsagyé sok
The twenty-eight īśvarīs and the rest—
kadö damchen lung tar tsub
All the oath-bound guardians who obey commands, swirling like the wind.
go shyir ging chen dé shyi sal
At the four gates are the four great kiṃkara.

kün kyang nangtong rolpé ngang
Within the play of appearance and emptiness,
sal la madré lhün gyi drub
They are clear, distinct, and spontaneously present.

né sum yigé sum gyi tsen
Their three centres are marked with the three syllables,
dorjé sum gyi ngowor drub
Which have the nature of the three vajras,
dé lé özer rab tröpé
From which powerful rays of light stream out, inviting
rangshyin chöying né chok dang
From the supreme realm of the natural dharmadhātu,
nubchok orgyen trulpé shying
From the emanated realm of Oḍḍiyāna in the west,
neyul durtrö gyé sok dang
From sacred places and lands such as the eight charnel-grounds,
khyepar ngayab langké ling
And especially from Cāmaradvīpa5
zangdok pal gyi riwo né
And the glorious Copper-Coloured Mountain,6
rigdzin düpé kyilkhor lha
The deities of the maṇḍala of Vidyādhara Assembly—
chendren né dir samadza
I invite you all to this place! Samāja!
2. The Invitation
Light incense, and with intense devotion and melodious voice, recite the following:
hung, ngön gyi kalpé dangpo la
Hūṃ! At the very beginning of this age,
orgyen yul gyi nubjang tsam
In the north-west of the land of Oḍḍiyāna,
pema gesar dongpo la
In the heart of a lotus flower,
yatsen chok gi ngödrub nyé
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
pema jungné shyé su drak
You are renowned as the ‘Lotus-born’,
khor du khandro mangpo dang
Surrounded by your retinue of many ḍākinīs
rigdzin drubtob gyatsö kor
And oceanic hosts of vidyādharas and siddhas.
khyé kyi jesu dak drub kyi
Following in your footsteps, I practise.
jingyi lab chir shek su sol
Come! Inspire us with your blessings—
né chok diru jin pob la
Shower down your blessings on this supreme place!
drub chok dak la wang shyi kur
Grant us, supreme practitioners, the four empowerments!
gek dang lokdren barché sol
Remove any negativity, obstructing force or disturbance to our practice!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us attainments, ordinary and supreme!
om ah hung benza guru pema tötreng tsal | benza samaya dza dza
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma tötrengtsal | vajra-samāja jaḥ jaḥ
3. Requesting the Deities to be Seated
hung, tab kyi kyepé kyilkhor dir
Hūṃ! In this maṇḍala created through skilful means,
sherab ying né drangpé lha
All you deities invited from the space of insight—7
rigdzin lamé kyilkhor nam
Maṇḍala deities of the vidyādhara masters—
nyimé ngang du gyepar shyuk
Remain here, delighted, in the state of non-duality.
benza samaya tishta lhen
vajra-samaya tiṣṭha len
4. Symbolic Prostration
hung, lhanyi rang la rangnyi lha
Hūṃ! The deity is oneself, oneself the deity.
rangjung trulpé kyilkhor la
This naturally arisen, emanated maṇḍala
zang ngen langdor machi kyang
Has nothing good or bad to accept or reject,
tendrel da yi chaktsal lo
Yet as a sign of interdependence, I offer prostration.
atipu ho | pratitsa ho
atipu hoḥ | pratīccha hoḥ
5. Offerings
om ah hung, chinang nöchü chöpé trin
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! The outer and inner, environment and beings, arise as offering clouds:
nyerchö döyön na nga dang
The five regular offerings and five sensual delights,
tashi dzé tak gyalsi dün
Auspicious substances and symbols, seven emblems of royalty,
men tor rakta dang ré tro
Medicine, torma and rakta, purely and joyfully offered,
gek shyé yowé garma dang
Dancing girls, laughing and moving with seductive grace,
dechen jorwé rik ma bum
And a hundred thousand consorts of great blissful union.
chöja chöjé chöyul kün
Offering, offerer and recipients of the offering—
yeshe ying su namdakpé
All are purified utterly into the space of wisdom;
chöpé chakgya chenpo sok
This great mudrā of offering,
rigdzin düpé lha la bul
I offer to you, deities of the Vidyādhara Assembly.
shyé né wang dang ngödrub tsol
Accept it, and grant empowerments and attainments!
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta rupa shapta gendhé rasa saparshé
ah hung
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda rūpa śabda gandha rāsa sparśa
āḥ hūṃ
sarva pentsa balingta rakta mahasukha dharmadhatu ah hung
sarva-pañca baliṅta rakta mahā-sukha dharmadhātu āḥ hūṃ
6. Offering Praise and Homage
hrih, machö trödral lama chö kyi ku
Hrīḥ! Unaltered simplicity, the dharmakāya guru,
dechen longchö lama chö kyi jé
Great blissful saṃbhogakāya guru, Lord of Dharma,
pedong lé trung lama trulpé ku
And the nirmāṇakāya guru born from a lotus—
ku sum dorjé chang la chaktsal tö
Three-kāya Vajradhara, to you I offer homage and praise!

dé jé tsekpar zab gyé ngödrub nyé
At Śaṅkarakūṭa you secured attainments, vast and profound.
durtrö gyé du gongpé tsensa zin
In the eight charnel grounds you captured the stronghold of realization.
rabjam kyilkhor gyatsö nga wanggyur
Sovereigns of an infinite ocean of maṇḍalas—
chok gi rigdzin gyé la chaktsal tö
Eight supreme vidyādharas, to you I offer homage and praise!

gongpa longchen yangpé kha la cho
You course through the vast, expansive sky of realization;
namgyur tulshyuk chöpé drowa dren
You guide beings through expressions of yogic conduct;
mejung dorjé nyingpö gong sokdzin
You preserve the vital realization of the wondrous vajra essence—
tuksé jebang nyerngar chaktsal tö
Twenty-five heirs of the heart—king and subjects—to you I offer homage and praise!

shyenyang rigdzin trulpé kyilkhor du
In addition, within this emanated maṇḍala of the vidyādharas,
damtsik tukjé khöpé tsa sum lha
Deities of the Three Roots, present on account of samaya and compassion,
yeshe ying lé trulpé ponyawa
And protector-messengers manifesting out of wisdom’s all-pervading space—
kyilkhor yongdzok lha la chaktsal tö
Deities of the entire maṇḍala, to you I offer homage and praise!
7. The Mantra Visualization
tukkar pema nyidé teng
At my heart, upon a lotus, sun and moon,
hung yik tinggé takor du
Is a blue letter hūṃ, around which there revolves
ngak treng pushé tabü kor
The mantra garland, as fine as if written with a single hair.
özer tröpé nöchü jang
Rays of light stream out to purify environment and inhabitants,
namdak lha yi dal du gom
And I meditate on the utterly pure maṇḍala of deities.
madrub bardu mitang ngo
Until this is actualized, I shall not let go of the practice!
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru padma siddhi hūṃ

Let the approach mantra flow like a river’s current.
At times, take up the experiential song of hūṃ,
And leave your mind in an undirected state.
In post-meditation, focus on the [vajra] chain.
Practitioners who accomplish this
Will be blessed by oceans of vidyādharas.
Mamos and ḍākinīs will grant them prophecies.
And they will be reborn on Cāmara’s Glorious Mountain—8
Of this there is no doubt! Samaya!
From the Manual of Concealed Instructions:
Having recited the approach mantra 1,200,000 times,
Recite the mantra of the essence of the life-force practice of the vidyādharas,
Which starts with oṃ and ends with hūṃ,
And which has twelve syllables elegantly nestled in-between.
This is the innermost essence of the life-force of the vidyādharas.
om ah hung benza maha guru sarva siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-māha-guru sarva siddhi hūṃ
As it is said: “Twelve hundred thousand brings accomplishment.”
III. The Conclusion: The Stages of the Feast Gathering
Arrange sensual delights as offerings. Alcohol and meat, in particular, are indispensable.
1. Blessing the Offering
hung, daknyi tuk lé ram yam kham
Hūṃ!  From my heart, the syllables raṃ, yaṃ and khaṃ stream out
tröpé tsok kyi nyekyön jang
To purify any faults or defects in the feast offerings.
om ah hung gi dütsir gyur
Oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ transform the offerings into amṛta,
döyön namkha nyampar pel
And sensual delights multiply until they are as infinite as space.
ram yam kham | om ah hung
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ | oṃ āḥ hūṃ
2. Invocation
hung, okmin dechen shyingkham dang
Hūṃ! From the Unsurpassed,9 the realm of great bliss,
nubchok orgyen trulpé ling
From the land of Oḍḍiyāna in the west
khyepar ngayab pal gyi ri
And especially from Cāmara’s Glorious Mountain,10
neyul durtrö gyé sok né
From the sacred places and lands such as the eight charnel grounds,
rigdzin düpé lhatsok nam
All you deities of the Vidyādhara Assembly
tsok la chendren shek su sol
Are invited to this feast gathering—come, we pray.
durtrö tsokkhang nyam ré ga
The charnel ground’s hall of gathering is full of joy,
khandrö duwa bakré dro
The assembly of ḍākinīs so joyous and inspiring,
naljor pomo dam ré tsang
The yogins and yoginīs so pure in their samaya,
döyön tsokchö dang dangden
The sumptuous feast offerings aglow with splendour.
dir shek tsok la jin chen pob
Come, shower down your blessings on this feast!
chok dang tün mong ngödrub tsol
Grant us attainments, ordinary and supreme!
3. Offering the First Portion of the Feast Offering
hung, tsa sum rigdzin gyatso dang
Hūṃ! Oceans of Three Root deities and vidyādharas,
daki chösung damchen la
Ḍākinīs and dharma guardians bound under oath,
döyön longchö tsokchö bul
We offer you this sumptuous feast of sensual delights.
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us attainments, ordinary and supreme!
gana tsatra pu tsa khahi
gaṇacakra pūja khāhi
4. The Intermediate Offering: Confession
hung, dak gi tserab tokmé né
Hūṃ! Throughout the course of my lives without beginning,
sang ngak tekchen gor shyuk té
Any transgressions of the root or branch samayas
tsawa yenlak damnyam pa
I have committed since entering the Great Vehicle’s Secret Mantra,
döyön tsok kyi chöpé shak
With this feast offering of sensory delights, I now confess!
benza samaya ah
vajra-samaya āḥ
5. Liberation and Offering
hung, marik lé nyön zungdzin gyi
Hūṃ! Ignorance, karma, afflictions and dualistic grasping,
kyepé dakdzin rutra kün
Together with their creations, ego-clinging and all rudras—
zuk la pob chik nri tri dza
Let them be brought into this form—ṇṛ ṭṛ jaḥ!11
namshé chöying long du pé
Let their consciousness enter the dharmadhātu expanse—phaṭ!
zukpung tsok kyi khorlor rol
And let their body be enjoyed as the feast offering.
rutra sarva hala pantsa putsa khahi
rudra sarva hala pañca pūja khāhi
6. Dedicating the Remainder Offering
hung, kyilkhor chenpö muren la
Hūṃ! You who dwell on the periphery of the great maṇḍala,
nepé wangchuk ging langka
Īśvarī, kiṃkara and laṅkā spirits,
lhakmé torma di shyé la
Accept this remainder torma
naljor drubpé barché sung
And guard us yogins against obstacles to practice!
utsita balingta khahi
ucchiṣṭa baliṃ te khāhi
7. Invoking the Sacred Pledge
hung, shyeng shik rigdzin düpé lha
Hūṃ! Rise up, all you deities of the Vidyādhara Assembly!
chö kyi ying né kur shyeng la
Take form out of the dharmadhātu!12
changchub drubpé barché tul
Crush any obstacles to our attainment of awakening!
nöchü jungwé güpa sol
Halt the decline of the elements in the environment and beings!
tsalung wangtang nyampa sö
Heal any weakness of the channels, wind-energies and authentic presence!13
drubpé drebu chipar dzö
And cause our practice to bear fruit!
8. Invoking the Covenant
hung, ngöntsé okmin dechen shying
Hūṃ! Long ago, in the Unsurpassed realm of great bliss,
lha né sum sok nyamgawar
In places full of joy, like the Three Divine Realms,14
sang chen gyüdé né ten tsé
When the great secret tantras were revealed,
dorje tekpé kasung nam
The guardians of the teachings of Vajrayāna
damtsik nyenpö dral du shyak
Were assigned places in keeping with their pledges.

bardu gangchen bö kyi yul
Then, in Tibet, the land of snows,
lobpön pema tötreng gi
When the master Lotus Skull-Garland,15
sang ngak chökhor korwé tsé
Turned the wheel of Secret Mantra Dharma,
sipé lhasin chegu yi
He seized the life-force of all major gods and demons
soknying trok té tsi su pab
And brought them within his ranks.

tama ösal dakpé shying
Finally, in the pure realm of luminosity,
dewa chenpö podrang du
Within the palace of great bliss,
rigdzin pema wangchen la
The vidyādhara Pema Wangchen16
pejung drimé özer gyi
Was empowered by the Lotus Born and Drimé Özer17
longchen zab gyé ukyung shying
With the profound seal of the Vast Expanse.18
yeshe ying kyi khandromé
When the ḍākinī of the all-pervading space of wisdom
longsal da ri trepé tsé
Entrusted him with the symbolic script to reveal the Luminous Expanse
zagö sok gi pudri sok
You, Wild Za ‘Razor of the Life Force’19 and the rest,
kasung nyenpö khelang shyin
Took a solemn oath to guard this teaching.
chötor gyenden di shyé la
So, accept this offering torma with all its ornaments,
lé shyi trinlé drubpar dzö
And carry out the four types of enlightened activity!
9. Maintaining the Relationship with the Immovable Goddesses20
hung, pal gyi kanyen bö kham kyong
Hūṃ! You who obey the command of the Awesome One and protect Tibet,
masing tenma chunyi nam
Twelve Immovable Goddesses—mothers and sisters—
dir jön tormé shalchu shyé
Come! Accept this cleansing water of the torma,
cholwé trinlé drubpar dzö
And carry out the activities entrusted to you!
mama hrim hrim balingta khahi
mama hrīṃ hrīṃ baliṃ te khāhi
10. Horse Dance
hung, rigdzin gyalwé kyilkhor dir
Hūṃ! In this maṇḍala of the vidyādhara buddhas,
lokpar drenpé damsi kün
All the corrupting spirits of samaya violation
nen no tekpa rim gü gya
Are held beneath the seal of the nine vehicles.
namyang dangwar magyur chik
Let them never rise again!
satom bhayanen
stvaṃ bhaya nen
11. Receiving Accomplishments
ho, rigdzin kyilkhor lhatsok nam
Hoḥ! Deities of the maṇḍala of the vidyādharas,
nyen ching drubpé damtsik tem
The commitments of approach and accomplishment are fulfilled,
dorje sempé namyang lang
And the dawn of Vajrasattva is breaking,
ngödrub tsolwé dü la bab
The time has come to grant accomplishments!
ku sung tuk kyi kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍalas of body, speech and mind,
mi né yeshe sangwa chok
Inspire us with blessings of the three vajras
dorje sum gyi jin lob la
Of supreme, secret wisdom that is unconfined.
chok dang tünmong ngödrub kün
And grant us all the attainments, ordinary and supreme,
danta nyi du tobpar tsol
Here and now, this very instant, I pray!
om ah hung benza guru pema tötreng tsal benza samaya dza | kaya waka tsitta a la la siddhi phala
hung ah
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru tötrengtsal vajra samaya jaḥ | kāya vāk citta alala siddhi phala hūṃ āḥ
12. Confession of Mistakes in Practice
hung, rigdzin düpé kyilkhor du
Hūṃ! In the maṇḍala of the Vidyādhara Assembly,
chödzé ma tsang drubpa yel
If my offerings were incomplete, my practice inattentive,
tingdzin jing muk tib lasok
Or my meditation drowsy, dull or lifeless,
galtrul nongpa zöpar sol
Pray forgive all such error and confusion.
13. Dissolution
ho, chu lé chubur dolwa shyin
Hoḥ! Just like bubbles formed out of water,
rang lé trulpé kyilkhor lha
The deities of the self-emanated maṇḍala,
yeshe ying su benza mu
Dissolve into wisdom’s basic space—vajra muḥ!
jetob gyumé lha kur dang
In post-meditation, everything arises as the deity’s illusory form.
14. Dedication
ho, dü sum sakpé getsa kün
Hoḥ! All sources of virtue accumulated in the three times,
namkhyen dömé gyu ru ngo
I dedicate as the cause for realizing primordial omniscience.
dak sok düpar chepa nam
May I and all those assembled here
tsombu chik tu sangye shok
Attain enlightenment together, in a single maṇḍala!
Repeat three times
15. Prayer of Auspiciousness
ho, rigdzin gyüpé jinlab dang
Hoḥ! Through the blessing of the lineage of vidyādharas,
könchok sum gyi denpa dang
The truth of the Three Rare and Sublime Ones,
sang ngak zabmö tendrel gyi
And the interdependent circumstances of profound Secret Mantra,
jikgyé shyiwé tashi shok
May all be auspicious, to pacify the eight fears!21
tsesö gyepé tashi shok
May all be auspicious, for extending longevity and merit!
nangwa wang dü tashi shok
May all be auspicious, to bring perception under our control!
lokdren tsarchö tashi shok
May all be auspicious, to annihilate negative, misleading forces!
nang shyen lha kü chakgyar dzok
With all attachment to perception transformed and perfected as the form of the deity,
dra drak dechen ngak su dak
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
dren tok ösal chökur min
All thoughts matured into the luminosity of dharmakāya—
jalü zangtal tashi shok
May all be auspicious, so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!

Ema! This mind treasure, which contains the quintessence of the treasures,resounded as vajra
music in symbolic scriptin the palace of the luminous expanse of all-pervading space.I thought
to seal it in my heart and conceal it,yet, prompted by the signs of vidyādhara ḍākinīs,I
set it down for the benefit of followers with karmic fortune.Conceal it in your heart!
Samaya.

| Translated by Han Kop and Adam Pearcey for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020, based on the
commentaries of Khenpo Chemchok and Khangsar Tenpé Wangchuk, and with thanks to Gyurme
Avertin and Matthias Staber.
↑ The bali (Skt.) or torma (gtor ma) within Tibetan Buddhism is a ritual cake, usually hand-moulded
from butter and flour and coloured with dyes, which can symbolize a deity, a maṇḍala,
an offering, or even a weapon.↑ Skt. siddhi.↑ I.e. clear seeing, Skt. vipaśyanā↑ Tib.
yidam (yi dam).↑ Tib. Ngayab Lanke Ling (rnga yab lang+ka’i gling).↑ Tib. Zangdokpalri (zangs
mdog dpal ri).↑ Skt. prajñā.↑ I.e., the Copper Coloured Mountain.↑ Skt. Akaniṣṭha↑ I.e.,
the Copper Coloured Mountain.↑ Khenpo Chemchok mentions that ṇṛ represents the consciousness
of enemies, ṭṛ the consciousness of obstructing forces, and with jaḥ we visualize that
the negative forces become indivisibly united with the whatever support we are using.↑
I.e., the form of Hayagrīva.↑ Tib. Wangtang (dbang thang).↑ Khenpo Chemchok comments that
the Three Divine Realms are The Unsurpassed, the Joyous Realm (Skt. Tuṣita), and the Heaven
of the Thirty-Three.↑ I.e., Padmasambhava.↑ I.e., Jigme Lingpa.↑ Stainless Light Rays. I.e.,
Longchenpa.↑ The Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse or Longchen Nyingtik.↑ Za Rāhula.↑
Skt. Sthāvarā, Tib. Tenma (brtan/bstan ma).↑ Fear of: drowning, thieves, lions, snakes, fire,
spirits, captivity and elephants. Their spiritual counterparts are: doubt, lust, avarice,
envy, wrong views, hatred, delusion and pride.