The Spontaneous Vajra Song of Fulfilment and Confessionfrom the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse
revealed by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa

There follows the great confession and fulfilment of samaya by means of outer and inner sensory
stimulants within the gaṇacakra. In this, the relinquishment and realisation in the minds
of the assembled vidyādharas themselves comprise the very nature of the maṇḍalas of the
nine successive vehicles. Although this is manifest, still as a means to awaken the guests
in the sky before you, recite the following:

namo, deshek nyingpö drowa yong la khyab
Namo. The essence of the sugatas pervades all beings.
sem ni gyachen chok tu rab kyé ching
I generate bodhicitta—thorough, expansive, and supreme.
drowa didak malü sangye gyu
For all beings possess the cause of buddhahood;
di na nömin semchen gangyang mé
Not a single one is unsuitable as a vessel.

shyeng shik shyeng shik tob chu ngawé lha
Arise, arise, all you deities who possess the ten powers.
dü lé mi da tukjé wang gi na
Do not delay! But through the force of your compassion,
semchen dön la gongpé könchok sum
Come, Three Jewels concerned for beings’ welfare,
yi kyi trul shying shampé né diru
To this place, created and arranged through my own imagination.
gyalwa khor ché malü shek su sol
Come now, all you victorious ones, together with your retinues.
benza samaya dza pema kamala ya satom
Vajra samāja. Padmakamalāyas tvaṃ
With these verses from the Moon Lamp Sūtra,1 the field of merit is created. The whole of appearance
and existence is consecrated through the profound, clear vajra samādhi and transformed
into the mudrā of offering.
Sprinkle the inner offering on the tormas as you recite:
om, küntak nangwa nö kyi torshyong du
Oṃ. In the torma container—the outer universe of imputed appearance,
shyenwang sipa chü kyi tormar jang
Dependent existence, the torma of the inner contents, is purified.
yongdrub chöying longchen gongpa yi
Through realization of the perfect, the vast expanse of dharmadhātu,
nangsi shyir shyeng kunzang chöpé trin
Appearance and existence arise as Samantabhadra’s offering clouds, spontaneously manifest in
the ground of reality,
pomé namkha dzö du ngawang gyur
And I gain mastery over the changeless treasury of space.
nama sarva tathagaté bayo bisho mukhebé sarva takham utgaté saparana imam gagana kham soha
namaḥ sarva tathāgatebhayo viśva mukhebhyaḥ sarvathākhaṃ udgate spharaṇa imaṃ gagana khaṃ svāhā
(seven times)

ah, rangjung lhündrub jazer lü kyi bub
Āḥ. Within the sphere of the naturally arising, spontaneously perfect body of rainbows and light-rays
gyutrul tsok gyé rolpa sinpö drong
Is the magical display of the eight collections of consciousness, the city of rākṣasas.
nying ü zangdok palri podrang né
At my heart’s centre is the palace of the Copper-Coloured Mountain—
rikdü maha gurü tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the great Guru, embodiment of all buddha families, be fulfilled.2

shyiying tongsal kuntuzangpo yi
The basic space of the ground, clarity and emptiness, is Samantabhadra,
shyinang longkü tsal lé gongpa pö
Whose realization is transferred through ground-appearance, the sambhogakāya expression,
da tsik lo lé depé kyilkhor né
In a maṇḍala that transcends symbols, words and the conceptual mind—
gonggyü dakpa nyiden tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the mind-direct lineage of twofold purity be fulfilled.

ngepa ngaden lhündrub longkü tsal
The sambhogakāya’s expression, spontaneously perfect and complete with fivefold certainty,
rigdzin rigpé khor la da tön ching
Communicates through signs to the vidyādhara assembly of pure awareness,
gong dé dön gyü tsik dzok trulpé gar
So that dance-like emanations continue the transmission of the mind-direct and symbolic in perfect
words—
nyengyü tödrol chenpö tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the aural lineage that brings great liberation upon hearing be fulfilled.

tsönjé tak kyi da shok chenpö wang
By conferring the empowerment of the great scrolls of coded signs
lechen kyebü nying la kurwa lé
Upon the hearts of fortunate individuals with a karmic connection,
tsönja dön gyi gongpé sang dzö dol
The secret treasury of realizing the intended meaning is unlocked—
tegya mönlam wanggyü tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the transmissions through entrustment-seal and empowerment-through-aspiration
be fulfilled.

döné kuntuzangpo rangrig la
May all errors, such as parting from the all-pervasive realization
khyabdal gongpa güdu chepa dang
Of my own pure awareness, which is and has always been Samantabhadra,
sangye shyendu tsalwé nongpa kün
And searching for buddhahood elsewhere, be purified,
dak ne jatsol dralwé sa la kyol
And may I arrive at the state that is beyond activity and exertion.

General Fulfilment of the Nine Vehicles
kadak chokyen chenpö gongpa la
In the vision of vastness, primordial purity beyond all limits and dimensions,
drangjé tekpa tadé madrub kyang
There are no distinct vehicles to be enumerated.
küntok duljé kham wang sampé chir
Yet, to fit disciples’ ideas, temperaments, capacities and attitudes,
tekpa rim gur sharwé tukdam kang
Nine vehicles have arisen: may the noble intentions of the buddhas be fulfilled.

The Three Piṭakas1. The Maṇḍala of the Śrāvakas and the Vinaya
khorwa dukngal chenpor shepa yi
Having understood saṃsāra to be great suffering,
kündzob den shyi lam la rab shyuk né
And set out on the relative path of the four truths,
dakdzin chingwa chöpa nyentö kyi
Śrāvakas cut through the bonds of self-grasping—
tsombü kyilkhor nga yi tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the five gatherings be fulfilled.

sotar dulwé denö chenpo yi
All faults that come from contravening the great Vinaya piṭaka of individual liberation,
ché dang rangshyin galwé nyepa kün
Both proscribed and inherently negative actions,
michab mibé nying né shakpar gyi
I neither hide nor conceal but confess from the depths of my heart:
dak la pakpa drachom jingyi lob
May the noble arhats inspire me with their blessing.

2. The Maṇḍala of the Pratyekabuddhas and the Sūtras
lhakpé tsultrim labpé gyü dam shing
Controlling the mind through training in higher discipline,
pung sok rangshyin mepar tokpa dang
Realizing that the aggregates and the rest lack true reality,
tendrel chunyi luk lé dokpa yi
And reversing the twelve links of dependent origination—
ranggyal kyilkhor shyi yi tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the four pratyekabuddha maṇḍalas be fulfilled!

namdak tsultrim miyo tingdzin gyi
With pure discipline and unwavering meditative absorption,
labpa dodé sung tsam nyampa kün
All breakages of precepts related to the training of the Sūtra piṭaka,
gyöpé shak so jang shying dakpa dang
I remorsefully confess: may they be cleansed and purified.
tsok dang serü ranggyal ngödrub tsol
Grant me the accomplishment of the group-dwelling and rhinoceros-like pratyekabuddhas.

3. The Maṇḍala of the Bodhisattvas and the Abhidharma
chö kün gyuma tabur shepé ngang
Recognizing that all phenomena are like magical illusions,
nyingjé shyendön drub la ché pa shying
Courageously working for others’ benefit out of compassion,
den nyi lamkhyer ngönpé denö kyi
And bringing the two truths onto the path—may the noble intentions
kyilkhor chok kyi drangden tukdam kang
Of the Abhidharma piṭaka maṇḍalas, as numerous as the directions, be fulfilled!3

sosor tokpé sherab ting ngédzin
With the wisdom of discernment and meditative absorption,
takché mu shyi lam du golwa dang
May I purify the faults of straying into eternalism, nihilism and the four extremes
nyingjé nyugu kampé nongpa kün
And of causing the shoots of compassion to wither,
dak né küntu ö kyi sa la kyol
And may I reach the level of Universal Radiance!

Three Outer Tantras of Secret Mantra1. Kriyā
dakpa sum dang tsangdra sum chö ching
Upholding threefold purity4 and the three types of cleanliness,5
dam yé tadé jé khol nampar drub
Practising with separate samaya- and wisdom-being in the manner of lord and servant,
tepé dewa lam jeja gyü kyi
And making a path of the bliss that comes from gazing—
kyilkhor druk gi lhatsok tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the deities of the six Kriyā-tantra maṇḍalas be fulfilled!

2. Caryā
kriyé tab dang yogé naljor la
By practising the method of Kriyā and discipline of Yogatantra
chanyam chöpé maning tekpa té
In equal measure in this, the neuter vehicle,
ngönjang nga yi kyilkhor gyal chok drub
Supreme victorious maṇḍalas are cultivated through the five manifest awakenings—
chögyü kyilkhor gyatsö tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the ocean-like Caryā-tantra maṇḍalas be fulfilled.

jachö gyüdé lha ngak tingdzin dang
I openly confess all subtle and coarse impairments of the samayas
tra rak damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
Related to deity, mantra and samādhi in both Kriyā and Caryā tantra.
khachö lasok drubchen nam gyé kyi
May a shower of the eight great accomplishments—6
tünmong ngödrub dzemé char du nyil
Of the celestial realm and the rest—rain down unceasingly!

3. Yoga Tantra
chi nang sang sum namdak denpa yi
With the truth of threefold purity—outer, inner and secret,7
lha dang naljor nyimé chenpor tok
Deity and yoga are realized as great non-duality,
chakgya shyi dang zabsal tingdzin nyé
And the four mudrās and profound, clear samādhi are attained—
lingtsé guden yogé tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the nine-sector maṇḍala of Yogatantra be fulfilled.

dak dang lha la zang ngen tepa dang
Viewing myself and the deity in terms of good and bad,
nyendrub chöpa jinsek chakpa dang
Discontinuing approach and accomplishment or the fire offering,
kyilkhor drubpé yenlak nyampa kün
And all downfalls in the branches of maṇḍala cultivation—
zöpar shyé né chok gi ngödrub tsol
Please forgive such faults and grant me the supreme attainment.

The Three Inner Tantras of Unsurpassable Secret Mantra 1. Tantra Mahāyoga
detong long yang tingdzin sum gyi bub
In the vast expanse of bliss-emptiness, the sphere of the three samādhis,
kyerim nöchü dakpa rabjam su
There arise, through the generation phase, the peaceful and wrathful deities of the Illusory
Display, the Eight Herukas, and so on,
yong shar gyutrul shyitro kagyé sok
As the infinite purity of the outer world and its contents—
tsombü kyilkhor chunyi tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the twelve maṇḍala gatherings be fulfilled.

sheja nga dang mipang dangdu lang
I confess all harmful actions and obscurations, impairments and breakages,
drub dang chéjé damtsik nyishu nga
Of such vows as the twenty-five commitments—five to be recognised,8 five that must not be abandoned,9
sang chu lasok nyamchak dikdrib kün
Five to be accepted,10 five to be accomplished11 and five to be enacted,12 as well as the ten
secrets,13 and the rest.
shak so rigdzin nam shyi sa la kyol
May I reach the four levels of a vidyādhara!

2. Scriptural Transmission Anuyoga
köpa lü kyi shyalmé khangchen nang
Within the great celestial palace of the body’s subtle structure,
tsa sum khorlo nga yi jazer bub
Are the three channels, five chakras and a sphere of rainbow light,
ying dang yeshe nyamjor rigpé tsal
The union of basic space and wisdom, the power of awareness—
anuyogé kyilkhor tukdam kang
May the noble intentions of the maṇḍala of Anuyoga be fulfilled!

namshé tsok gyé nyenyön nyishu dang
With the eight collections of consciousness, twenty secondary afflictions,
semjung ngabchu gyétri shyitong gi
Fifty-one mental factors and eighty-four thousand concepts
toktsok dak né dren dzok chakgyé ku
All purified, the form of the mudrā is perfect upon recollection—
lhenkyé dewa chenpö sa la kyol
May I reach the level of co-emergent great bliss!

3. Luminous Great Perfection (Atiyoga)
sherig zangtal nyukmé shyalyé su
In the innate celestial palace of unimpeded cognizance and awareness
yé dang drön druk jazer tiklé long
Are the six lamps of primordial radiance and the expanse of rainbows, rays and light-spheres,14
rigpa chü du minpa ati lha
Where awareness matures into the vital essence, deities of Ati—
shyal chak dzinpa dakpé tukdam kang
May the noble intention wherein clinging to faces and hands is purified be fulfilled.

rangdrol rigpa dorje lugu gyü
By training in the vajra chains of self-liberated pure awareness,
shyuk tang sum dang ziktang nam sum gyi
And by applying the three postures and three gazes,
chün té nang shyi chö zé dömé ying
May I attain the fourth vision, the primordial space in which phenomena are exhausted,
lhündrub dzogpachenpö sa la kyol
And reach the level of spontaneously present great perfection!

General and Specific Offerings to the Three Roots, Ḍākinīs and Oath-Bound Ones
dorna rabjam kyilkhor gyatsö long
In short, within the expanse of infinite, oceanic maṇḍalas,
tadé rigpé takpé si shyi drön
All the guests of existence and quiescence are designated through awareness as distinct. 15
dul nyé ma tsang mepa tamché dang
All of these, as numerous as atoms, with none omitted, as well as
nangwa yab kyi rangshyin rahula
The nature of appearances and the male protectors, Za Rāhula;
tongpa yum gyi ngowo ékatsa
The essence of emptiness and the female protectors, Ekajaṭī;
zungjuk tukjé benza sadhu sok
And appearance and emptiness indivisible in compassionate energy, Vajrasādhu:
nyingtik nyenpö kasung tamché dang
Together with all the guardians of the powerful teachings of Nyingtik,
orgyen gyagar balyul khaché ling
Those of Oḍḍiyāna, India, Nepal and Kashmir,
ashyé yul dang drusha zangling yul
Of the land of Azha,16 Drusha17 and the Copper Land,18
serling ngayab langké lingtren dang
Of the lesser isles of Suvarṇadvīpa, Cāmara, and Laṅka,
gyanak jong yul gesar mak gi ling
Of China, the valleys of Yunnan,19 and the warrior country of Gesar,20
tsari tra dang lhomön dremö shong
Of Tsāritra,21 the southern district of Mön,22 Sikkim,
ngari korsum ütsang ru shyi dang
The three provinces of Ngari and four of Ü Tsang,
dokham gang druk bé né nyenpö yul
Of the six ranges of Dokham and sacred hidden lands,
jong nga ling druk ser ri lhünpö po
Of the five valleys, the six continents,23 the golden mountains, and summit of Sumeru,
sumchu tsasum neyul durtrö nyen
Of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, sacred places, and awesome charnel grounds,
chökhor tsuklak drubné wenné kyi
Of Dharma-wheeled temples, places of practice and isolated hermitages,
khoryuk jönshing drakri tso ling la
As well as warrior spirits, ḍākinīs and dharma-protectors,
nepé pawo daki chösung tsok
Who dwell in all the surrounding forests, rocky hills and islands;
shyal né sung dang jesu nangwa dang
Guardians of the direct teachings of the Buddha, teachings that he authorized,
jinlab lungten daknang tenchö dang
And those that came about through his blessing, as well as prophecies, pure visions, and treatises,
tukter gongter zabter dzéter sok
Heart treasures, mind treasures, profound treasures and material treasures—
ter rik chobgyé chö kyi katé ching
The eighteen types of terma and dharma that has been entrusted,
kyilkhor gyatsö muren la nepé
As well as all those who dwell on the perimeter of ocean-like maṇḍalas,
damchen daki tensung gyatso yi
All the infinite oath-bound ḍākinīs and guardians of the teachings—
tuk dang galgyur nongpa chichi pa
Whatever I have done to upset you, whatever errors I have made,
nying né shakso tsangpé shyalré tön
I confess from the depth of my heart: show me the expression of forgiveness, I pray!

takché tadral uma chenpö bub
The sphere of the Great Middle Way is free from the extremes of eternalism and nihilism.
khordé rokyang zungjuk chakgya cher
Through merging with the Great Seal that is the union of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, rasanā and lalanā,24
jarwé nang sem shyen drol dzogpaché
There is the Great Perfection, free from attachment to appearances and mind,
tingdzin namkha dzö kyi gyutrul lé
And in meditative absorption the illusory display that is the treasury of space:

The Outer Offering
zungdzin pé kyi torwé jé shyik cher
‘Phaṭ’ scatters dualistic grasping, and, in the great aftermath of its destruction,
lodral tuk tré shepé ngowo ru
Upon encountering the essence of consciousness beyond the ordinary mind,
tsok gyé kané dakpé tashi tak
The eight collections of consciousness in their primordial purity are the auspicious signs;
nangwa gyen du sharwé gyalsi dün
Phenomena arise as adornments in the form of the seven royal emblems;
riktong jenpar drolwé döyön nga
The five sensory pleasures are liberated in naked awareness and emptiness;
kyen ngen lam du longpé chakgya gar
And negative circumstances, taken as the path, become the deity’s gestures and dance-like display.
bullo choktün ngödrub gyatsor kyil
With this, I offer! Let an ocean of supreme and ordinary accomplishments gather!
The Inner Offering
longchen shyönnu bumkü kapalar
In the kapāla of the vast expanse, the youthful vase body,
duk sum namtok drekpa tulwé trak
I offer the blood of subjugated arrogant spirits, thoughts related to the three poisons;
ku sum yongdrol chenpö balingta
The balingta of the great and total freedom of the three kāyas;
redok tsarchö sha nga dütsi nga
The five meats and five nectars that are the eradication of hope and fear;
nyidé dangma tsa gyé yenlak tong
The essence of the sun and moon with eight principal and a thousand minor ingredients—
rangjung lhündrub nang gi damdzé kün
All the self-arisen, spontaneously present inner samaya substances,
bullo tulshyuk tarchin ngödrub tsol
I offer: grant me the siddhi of perfecting yogic conduct.
The Secret Offering
dömé tongchen ying kyi bhagé long
In the expanse of the bhaga that is great primordial basic space
namkün chokden rigpé dorje yi
The vajra of awareness that is endowed with the supreme of all aspects
tendrel lukdok khorwé bakchak dral
Liberates saṃsāric tendencies by reversing the process of dependent origination,
detong ga shyi nyam tsal dzokpé gar
And the four joys of bliss-emptiness are experienced as the play of perfect mastery.
jordrol tulshyuk tarchin sangwé dzé
The secret substances of the perfection of the yogic disciplines of union and liberation,
bullo shyennang wang dü ngödrub tsol
I offer: grant me the siddhi of controlling others’ perceptions.

tsenma dzé dang tsenmé tingdzin gyi
With tangible substances and intangible samādhi,
lé shyi trinlé drubpé chakgya dang
I offer you the mudrās of accomplishing the four types of activity
shuk drol möpé tsöncha khyö la bul
And the powerful weapon of forceful liberation:
mönjuk semkyé drakpuk shya tar gyön
When a yogi who trains in the bodhicitta of aspiration and action and wears the roof of a cave
as a hat upon the head,25
chakmé khorwa pangpé naljor la
And who is without attachment and has renounced saṃsāra,
ma nyé khayok chaldrok ngenjor shom
Faces unfounded accusations, idle gossip or malicious conduct,
drub la barchö tukgyü trukpa yi
Obstacles to practice or anything that disturbs the mind,
mönlam lokpé dra dré nyingtrak tung
Drink the heart-blood of such enemies and spirits of perverse aspiration!

tönting ralpé lekbam menché né
From the volume of text that is bound within my blue-black locks
dokpé nyerché tramo yenchö du
Down to the lowliest items that I possess and employ—
dorna naljor yi la dzawé dzé
Whatever, in short, this yogic practitioner holds dear,
tsa sum damchen daki lador bul
I offer as a life-stone26 for the Three Roots, oath-bound ones and ḍākinīs.

naktröwé ta tso ling drakkyib sok
In forests and remote lands, on islands, in rocky shelters, and other such places—
ngemé né su changchub drubpé chir
So that I might cultivate awakening in undetermined locations,
takmo risul drim tar gyuwé tsé
As I wander like a tigress passing through mountain valleys,
naljor lü la dribma shyindu drok
Please accompany this yogi as a shadow follows the body.

Aspiration Prayer
tenyo nang sem shyenpé chingpa yi
Bound through attachment to the inanimate world and animate beings, appearances and mind,
tra rak namtok gyagyü gyutrul chen
I am held in the illusion of deceitful thoughts, both coarse and subtle.
sishyi nyimé shardrol dünyam long
In the expanse of simultaneous arising and liberation, in which existence and peace are non-dual,
bullo chönyi zésar khyolwar shok
I offer: may I reach the level at which phenomena are exhausted into dharmatā!

künshyi ngang né lé lung yöpé trul
Through the movement of karmic winds from the state of the all-ground,
bakchak semnyi ngal gyar tumpa lé
Habitual tendencies envelop mind’s true nature, sealing it as in a womb.
jungwé sha trak drö uk pungpö kham
The elements of flesh, blood, warmth and breath—the body’s constituents—I offer.
bullo dak gi jalü drubpar shok
May I accomplish the rainbow body!
Dedication
di tsön dü sum sakpé getsa kün
All sources of virtue amassed throughout the three times, as represented by this practice,
dren rik zakpa mepé yeshe kyi
Are, with the immaculate wisdom of pure presence and awareness,
khor sum yongdak chenpor gyé tab né
Sealed within the great and total purity of the three spheres,
neluk dzogpachenpö long du ah
And in the expanse of the Great Perfection, the natural state: āḥ!

Guhya. Let the signs be absorbed.
When I, the bhusuku Khyentse Özer, was alone, engaged in the heart practice in the Flower Cave,
the ḍākinīs’ assembly hall, at Omin Palgyi Chimphu, at the first rising of the moon in
the Iron Dragon year, on the day of the festival that commemorates King Udrāyaṇa of Roruka
inviting our teacher and reverentially offering him gifts,27 through the favourable condition
of performing the heart-practice, combined with the pure auspicious connection of the
location, while pure wisdom arose as the essence of awareness, coded signs burst forth from
the secret treasury of the vast expanse of realization, appearing in the form of letters.
Easy and convenient to practise, complete with all the points of profundity, this is a
means to purify all impairments, breakages, misdeeds and obscurations, and to restore commitments;
it has the power to dispel sudden misfortune and inauspiciousness, to fulfil wishes
and aspirations, and to bring about accomplishment. Therefore, my followers should adopt
this upadeśa. It is entrusted to the powerful guardians of Nyingtik. Conceal it from the
unfortunate who hold wrong views. Athaṃ. Gya.
Samaya. Gya. Gya. Gya.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey (with reference to the commentary by Muksang Tulku Pema Kunzang
Rangdrol and with the kind assistance of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche), 2019.
↑ The Moon Lamp Sūtra is more commonly known as the King of Samādhi Sūtra (Samādhirāja Sūtra,
Toh 127).↑ The Tibetan phrase 'tukdam kang' (thugs dam bskang), which is repeated throughout
this section, is notoriously difficult to render in English. Although it is often taken
to mean 'restore the [heart] samaya' with a given deity, where the dam is understood as
an abbreviation of dam tshig (samaya), that is not how the term is glossed in the commentary
by Pema Kunzang Rangdrol (hereafter PKR), Klong chen snying thig gi skong bshags rdo rje'i
thol glu'i tshig 'grel nyung bsdus. Instead, he glosses dam as an abbreviation of dam
pa, meaning excellent, noble, sacred, holy, etc., and explains the entire phrase as 'confessing
impairments and breakages that oppose the intentions of a given deity and restoring
their noble delight' (thugs dang 'gal ba'i nyams chag bshags shing dgyes pa dam pa bskang
ngo). Hence, the translation here as 'May the noble intentions be fulfilled.'↑ That is to
say, there are ten maṇḍala gatherings related to the Abhidharma piṭaka, equal in number to
the ten directions.↑ i.e., the purity of deity and maṇḍala, the purity of substance and
enjoyment, and the purity of mantra and samādhi. (PKR)↑ i.e., taking the three types of bath,
changing the three sets of clothing and relying upon the three whites and three sweets.
(PKR)↑  i.e., the accomplishments of the celestial realm, the sword, the pill, fleet-footedness,
the vase, the yakṣa, the elixir, and the balm of magic sight.↑ i.e., the outer purity
of the aggregates and elements, the inner purity of karma and afflictions and the secret
purity of sensory objects and faculties.↑ i.e., the true nature of the five aggregates,
the five elements, the five sense faculties, the five sense consciousnesses, and the five
sense objects. ↑ i.e., the five poisons of desire, anger, dull indifference, pride and jealousy,
which are to be transformed into the five pure wisdoms. ↑ i.e., accepting faeces,
urine, blood, semen and bone marrow.↑ i.e., the five families to be accomplished: vajra,
ratna, padma, karma and tathāgata.↑  i.e., Union, liberation, taking what is not given, lying
and idle gossip.↑ The ten secrets are the four general secrets of the view, meditation,
action and fruition; the four intermediate secrets; what is worthy of secrecy; and the secrecy
through entrustment.↑ A note says that in addition to the four lamps as commonly enumerated
in Dzogchen literature, the text here refers to the lamp at the time of the bardo,
which leads to the primordial state though recognition of the arising of the naturally manifest
maṇḍala of clear light; and the ultimate fruitional lamp, which is the wisdom that
resides within basic space once the stronghold of the fruition is captured within the realm
of the youthful vase body. The commentary says that this note was added by Jigme Lingpa
himself.↑ Some editions have sri zhu’i mgron, meaning ‘guests invited out of reverence’,
but the translation here follows Pema Kunzang Rangdrol’s commentary and those editions in
which the phrase is given as srid zhi’i mgron, i.e., the guests of existence and quiescence.↑
Near Ngari in Western Tibet (PKR).↑ Another name of Drugu (gru gu) (PKR).↑ PKR identifies
this with Sri Lanka.↑ i.e., Sa tham ’jang yul (PKR).↑ i.e., Trom (khrom) (PKR).↑ More
commonly known simply as Tsāri.↑ i.e., Tibet’s southern border region.↑ i.e., Candra (zla
ba), Sītābha (’od dkar), Varaparamakuśa (ku sha), Kiṃnara (mi’am ci), Krauñca (khrung khrung)
and Raudra (drag po). They are known as lands of enjoyment (bhoga-bhūmi; longs spyod sa).
See also Vesna Wallace, The Inner Kālacakratantra: A Buddhist Tantric View of the Individual
(New York: Oxford University Press), 2001, p.71.↑ Rasanā (ro ma) here can be understood
as multiplicity and lalanā (rkyang ma) as singularity, so union implies the merging of
multiplicity and singularity. (PKR)↑ In other words, the yogi remains constantly in retreat
and does not go elsewhere. (AZR)↑ bla rdo↑ i.e., the second day of the first month of
the Tibetan calendar, which is the second of fifteen days commemorating miracles that Śākyamuni
Buddha performed.