The Secret Practice of the Great Compassionate One, Natural Liberation of Suffering
from the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse
revealed by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa

Namo lokeśvaraya!
The secret practice is done in the following manner. The deity’s form is the supremely noble
Great Compassionate One, his essence is the natural liberation of suffering—this is an extremely
profound, essential point.
The best place to do this practice is somewhere with earth that is smooth and even, and white
in colour; the place should abound in goodness and virtue, and not be under the power of
enemies and malevolent spirits.
On top of a perfectly arranged maṇḍala, as wide as an arrow, arrange the accomplishment substances
as explained in the ‘Pratri’ commentary.1 Alternatively, do the practice based on the
supports of ambrosia,2 rakta, and torma.
There are the preliminaries, a main section, and a conclusion.
1. Preliminaries
1.Taking Refuge
namo, tamé khorwa dukngal rangshyin la
Namo! In this never-ending cycle of saṃsāra, which is by nature suffering,
wangmé chöpé dak sok semchen kun
I and all other beings helplessly roam about.
chok sum ngowo pakchok tukjé lhar
From the depths of my heart and with utmost longing
nying né dungshuk drakpö kyab su chi
I take refuge in the embodiment of the Three Jewels—the supremely noble Lord of Compassion.
Three times.
2. Arousing Bodhicitta
ho, pama rik druk nyingjé yul gyur kün
Hoḥ! All sentient beings of the six classes—my very own parents—the objects of my compassion,
rang ngo mashé trulpé lé la chö
Do not recognize the nature of their minds and act out of delusion.
tsemé nyingjé changchub lam gö chir
So that, with immeasurable compassion, I might set beings on the path to awakening,
mönjuk döndam semchok kyepar gyi
I arouse the supreme mind of bodhicitta, relative—in aspiration and action—and absolute.
Three times.
3. Seven Branch Offering
ho, dü sum shyukpé kyabné tamché la
Hoḥ! To all sources of refuge throughout the three times,
güpé chaktsal chinang chöpa bul
In devotion, I pay homage, and make outer, inner, and secret offerings;
mi ge dikpé lé kün tol lo shak
I openly acknowledge and confess non-virtuous deeds and negative actions;
gé la yi rang chökhor korwar kul
And rejoice in all that is virtuous; I urge you to turn the wheel of Dharma,
shyuk soldeb so getsa changchub ngo
And request you to remain here; I dedicate all roots of virtue to enlightenment.
kün kyang pakpé gopang tobpar shok
May all beings attain the level of the Noble One!
4. Offering the Torma to Obstructing Forces
Bless the torma with
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
hrih, nga ni pema wang gi ku
Hrīḥ! I am in the form of the Mighty Lotus,
lokdren dulwé shepo ché
The great destroyer of all those who lead us astray.
nyön chik gek dang lokdren kün
Obstructing forces and misleading spirits, listen!
döyön torma di long la
Accept this torma offering of sensual delights,
gyatso chenpö patar deng
And be gone to the distant shore of the great ocean!
galté ka lé da jé na
If you dare disobey this command
dorjé towé lé né shyom
You will be annihilated—crushed beneath the vajra hammer.
dewé ka lé ma da shyik
Therefore do not disobey this command!
Recite the mantra of the four hūṃs.
5. The Protection Circle
hrih, nangsi tamché dorjé gur
Hrīḥ! Appearance and existence is the vajra tent,
nöchü kyilkhor sum gyi ngang
Beings and the environment have the nature of the three maṇḍalas.
bakchak trulwé dön gek nam
Against all those demons and obstructing forces of confused habitual tendencies
ku sum ngang du tsam ché do
I set the boundary from within the state of the three kāyas.
benza raksha raksha dzola hung pé
vajra rakṣa rakṣa jvala hūṃ phaṭ
6. Descent of Blessings
hung, tongnyi ying lé tukjé rolpé tsal
Hūṃ! From the basic space of emptiness, the radiance of compassion’s play
gakmé kha la chartrin tibpa shyin
Arises unceasingly, like clouds gathering in the sky.
kündzob tsenmé dzé kün jinlab pé
All the relative substances with characteristics are blessed
döné dakpé kyilkhor chenpor gyur
And transform into the great maṇḍala of original purity.
om jnana benza abeshaya pem pem sarva samaya dza
oṃ jñāna-vajrābhiṣaya peṃ peṃ sarva-samāja jaḥ
7. Blessing the Offering Substances
om ah hung, chi nang sangwé chödzé malüpa
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! All outer, inner, and secret offerings
nampa dzé la ngowo yeshe kyi
Appear as substances, yet are in nature wisdom.
dütsi chenpo ro gyé pal dzinpé
This great ambrosia contains the glory of a hundred tastes
kyilkhor lhatsok nyepé chi du gyur
And so becomes the most exquisite offering that delights the deities of the maṇḍala.
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé newité shapta
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda
sarva pentsa rakta balingta maha sukha pudza ah hung
sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-sukha pūjā āḥ hūṃ
Bless the offerings by reciting this three times.
2. The Main Section
There are seven parts.
1. Generating the Palace and the Deity
hrih, chö kün mimik shyimé tsadral ngang
Hrīḥ! From within the state without ground or basis, where all phenomena are free of conceptual
reference,
yingrik zungjuk dakpa chenpö shying
The union of basic space and awareness arises as the realm of great purity.
rangnang lhündrub riwo potala
My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is the Potala Mountain
datak tsennyi dzokpé kyilkhor ü
With symbols, signs, and characteristics perfect within the maṇḍala. In its centre
natsok pema tongden nyidé teng
Is a multi-coloured, thousand-petalled lotus, and sun- and moon-disk seats.

hrih lé rangnyi pakchok nyingjé lha
From hrīḥ, I arise as the Noble One, the deity of compassion,
dukngal rangdrol chenrezik wang ku
In the form of Lord Avalokiteśvara ‘Natural Liberation of Suffering’,
shyal chik chak shyi nyampé tab kyi shyeng
With one face and four hands and standing in a posture of equanimity.
tsawé chak nyi tukkar taljar tsul
The palms of my main two hands are joined at my heart
lhakma nam nyi drang treng pekar chang
And the remaining two hold a mālā and lotus.
longchö dzok ku dar dang rinchen dzé
I am in saṃbhogakāya form adorned with silks and jewels.
kar mar dangden rüpé gyen gyi tré
My complexion is white tinged with red, and I’m adorned with bone ornaments,
shyi tsul gu dang gyencha chusum dzé
The nine peaceful expressions and the thirteen ornaments.
Similar in posture to Khasarpaṇi.
utsuk rikdak öpakmépé tsen
Above my head is Amitābha, lord of the family.

chok shyir pema dab shyi den tengdu
In the four cardinal directions, and each seated on a four-petalled lotus, are:
shar du jetsün drolma kudok kar
Venerable Tārā in the east, her body white in colour,
lho ru özerchenma ser gyi dok
Mārīcī in the south, yellow in colour,
nub tu kurukullé pé rak dang
Kurukullā in the west, ruby red in colour,
jang du norgyün lhamo kudok jang
And Vasudhārā in the north, green in colour.
kün kyang rang rang gyen dang chaluk dzok
Their ornaments and garments are perfectly complete, each in their own respective style.

go shyir wangchen dé shyi lé dokchen
At the four doors are the four mighty ones in colours that match their particular activities.
driguk tö dzin dortab jik tsul ngam
All are in striding posture, majestic and terrifying, and hold hooked knives and skull-cups.
trowö ché dzok mepung long na gying
With wrathful ornaments, they are poised imposingly amidst masses of flame.
bar tsam sangye changsem rigdzin dang
In between, buddhas, bodhisattvas, vidyādharas,
pawo daki damchen trin tar tib
Heroic ones,3 ḍākinīs and samaya-bound Dharma protectors gather like clouds.
nangtong drib yok dralwé ying na sal
They arise as appearance and emptiness, vividly present in unobscured space.
kün kyang né sum yikdru sum gyi tsen
The deities' three centres are marked with the three seed syllables,
dé lé ö trö rangshyin né chok dang
From which light streams out to the natural, supreme abodes,
khyepar trulpé shyingkham potala
And especially to the nirmāṇakāya pure land of Potala,
neyul nyershyi durtrö gyé sok né
The twenty-four sacred places and the eight charnel grounds,
yeshe lhatsok benza samadza
Inviting the wisdom deities. Vajra-samājaḥ!
2. Invitation
hrih, nubchok dechen wang gi podrang né
Hrīḥ! From the Mighty Palace of Great Bliss in the West,
gönpo öpakmépa shek su sol
Protector Amitābha, please come!
trulpé shyingkham ri potala né
From the emanated pure realm of Mount Potala,
drodul chenrezik wang shek su sol
Mighty Avalokiteśvara, Tamer of Beings, please come!
tukjé drowa dulwé podrang né
From the palace of the compassionate tamer of beings,
kyilkhor lhatsok malü shek su sol
Deities of the maṇḍala, all of you, please come!
dakchak drubpapo la jingyi lob
Grant us, the practitioners, your blessings!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsal du sol
Grant us ordinary and supreme accomplishments!4
om lokishora guru deva dakini sarva samaya dza dza
oṃ lokeśvara-guru-deva-ḍākinī-sarva-samaya jaḥ jaḥ
3. Requesting the Deities to be Seated
hrih, mikmé rangdrol tukjé kyilkhor lhar
Hrīḥ! For the deities of the maṇḍala beyond reference—naturally liberating and compassionate—
shek jön shyuk su solwar mimik kyang
There is no coming, arriving, or remaining.
nyinang lobur drima jangpé chir
Yet to purify the adventitious stains of duality,
damyé nyimé ngowor tenpar shyuk
Please remain here firmly, samaya-being and wisdom-being inseparable.
benza samaya tishta ho
vajra-samaya tiṣṭha hoḥ
4. Prostration
hrih, chomden tukjé chenpö lhatsok la
Hrīḥ! Knowing that the blessed Compassionate One and the hosts of deities
rang shé trulpa dralwé da chak gar
Are oneself, free from confusion I prostrate symbolically.
lhachen trulgé namgyur jishyin du
From within a state free from acceptance or rejection,
panglang mepé ngang né tsalwar gyi
Like the manifestations of the great gods of Enjoying Emanation,5 I prostrate!
namo purushaya ho
namo puruṣāya hoḥ
5. Offerings
hrih, kuntuzangpö namrol chöpé trin
Hrīḥ! Samantabhadra’s display of offering clouds
metok dukpö marmé drichab dang
Of flowers, incense, lights, scented water,
shyalzé rolmo döpé yönten nga
Food, and music—the ﬁve sensual delights—
lhami paljor malü bul lo shyé
And the riches of gods and humans: all of this I offer. Please accept!
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta | rupa shabta gendhé rasa parshé
maha sarva pudza khahi
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda | rūpa śabda gandha rāsa sparśa
mahā sarva pūja khāhi
6. Special Offerings
hrih, khyepar mejung dewa chenpö dzé
Hrīḥ! The superior, wondrous substances of great bliss—
men tor rakta tsokchö dang ré tro
Ambrosia, torma, rakta, and feast-offerings—so joyful,
sherab rikma lodé nyukmé shi
The wisdom consort, and that which is beyond mind, the genuine nature—
bul lo shyé né wang dang ngödrub tsol
All this I offer. Please accept, and grant us empowerment and accomplishment!
sarva pentsa rakta balingta maha sukha dharmadhatu pudza ho
sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-sukha dharmadhātu pūjā hoḥ
7. Offering Praise
hrih, chöying tröpa dralwé podrang né
Hrīḥ! From the palace of basic space beyond elaboration, you arise
lhündrub longchö dzokpé nga wangchen
With mastery over the spontaneously present saṃbhogakāya.
tsemé nyingjé terchen chenrezik
Avalokiteśvara, great treasure of boundless compassion,
dukngal rangdrol ku la chaktsal tö
In your form as Natural Liberation of Suffering―to you I offer praise and homage.

tsemé shyi yi dro kün tarlam dren
With the four immeasurables, you guide all beings on the path of liberation.
gang la gang dul tukjé rolpé gar
With the dance of your compassion, you tame each according to their needs.
chiryang gyurwé tutob dzutrul chen
You possess the power to miraculously transform in various forms.
rik shyi semma nam la chaktsal tö
Ladies of the four families—to you I offer praise and homage!

nam shyi trinlé kün la wanggyur shying
With your mastery of all four enlightened activities
lokdren dul chir trotum rolpé tab
And your display of wrathful fury that subdues misleading forces,
tokmé gyurwé rik shyi hayagri
You manifest without hindrance. Hayagrīvas of the four families
kyilkhor yongdzok lha la chaktsal tö
And the entire maṇḍala of deities―to you I offer praise and homage!
8. Mantra Recitation
rangnyi tukjé chenpö tukka ru
I am the Great Compassionate One. In my heart
nyidé ga'u khajor yangpé ü
In the middle of a vast casket of conjoined sun and moon,
dawé teng na tuk sok hrih karpo
Upon a moon disc is the white life-force syllable hrīḥ,
dé tar yigé dünpé korwa lé
Encircled by the seven syllables of the mantra.
ö trö sangye changsem tamché dang
Light radiates out to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
khyepar tukjé chenpö tukgyü kul
Especially the Great Compassionate One, and invokes their wisdom minds.
dro druk semchen kün gyi lé nyön jang
Light streams out to all six classes of beings, purifying their karma and destructive emotions.
özer tsur dü dak la timpa yi
The rays return and dissolve into me,
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tobpar gyur
Through which I obtain accomplishments, ordinary and supreme.
Imbued with compassion for beings, recite the mantra:
om mani padmé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
If the approach phase is calculated numerically, recite ten million.The approach phase based
on duration is that time multiplied by four.6The approach phase based on signs depends on
the signs that arise. There are various signs that can arise in real life, in experiences,
and in dreams, such as collecting white flowers, climbing snow mountains, finding implements
of deities, playing music, and bathing.
In Particular, for Long-life Practice
pakpé tuk lé ö tröpé
From the Noble One’s heart light streams out,
jetsün drolmé tukgyü kul
Invoking the heart and mind of Venerable Tārā.
tenyö kham né tsechü dang
The vital essence of the elements, animate and inanimate,
la tse sok uk yarwa kuk
Life-spirit and life-force—whatever has been dissipated—is summoned back
drubja tsowö tuk sok ü
And dissolves into the beneficiary of the practice, who is visualized
salwa la tim tsé sing gyur
In the heart of the main deity, extending their life.
om mani padmé hung hrih | taré ayurjnana tsé droom nri dza soha
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | tāre ayur-jñāna tshe bhrūṃ nṛ ja svāhā
For Overcoming Obstacles and Increasing Merit
pakpé tuk lé ö tröpé
From the Noble One’s heart light streams out,
özer chen mé tukgyü kul
Invoking the heart and mind of Mārīcī.
lokpar drenpé trakdang chü
The lustre, radiance, and vitality of misleading spirits
bub chü drang shyin dak la tim
Is drawn in, like water through a pipe, and dissolves into me,
zijin nyida tabur gyur
Granting me the majestic brilliance of the sun and moon.
om mani padmé hung hrih | arya maritsyai mam soha
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | ārya-mārīcyai māṃ svāhā
For Magnetizing the Entire Three Realms
pakpé tuk lé ö tröpé
From the Noble One’s heart light streams out,
rikjé wangmö tukgyü kul
Invoking the heart and mind of Kurukullā.
tenyö dangchü malü dang
All the vital essence of the animate and inanimate,
khyepar mik jé tsesö wang
And in particular the life, merit, and power of the objects of our focus,
ö mar nampar mér gyi dü
Is completely gathered in the form of red light,
dak tim zijin barwar gyur
And dissolves into me, causing me to blaze with majestic brilliance.
om mani padmé hung hrih | kurukullé hrim hrim washam kuru yé soha
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | kurukulle hrīṃ hrīṃ vaśaṃ kuruye svāhā
For Filling the Treasury with Wealth
pakpé tuk lé ö tröpé
From the Noble One’s heart light streams out,
norgyünma yi tukgyü kul
Invoking the heart and mind of Vasudhārā.
lha lu drangsong mi norbu
All the wealth of the gods, nāgas, ṛṣis, and human beings
chakkyu tabü özer gyi
Is summoned with light-rays in the form of hooks
kuk né dak la tsolwar gyur
And bestowed upon me.
om mani padmé hung hrih | mama vasudhari soha
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | mama vasudhāri svāhā
By reciting this you will gain accomplishment. Your wealth will equal that of Vairocana. The
accomplishment substances such as the life-spirit stone and the life-force cakra, and the
crucial points of visualization, should be known from the ‘Commentary that Lays Bare the
Pith Instructions' alone.7 Samaya!

Thus, this teaching on the most profound crucial points of the sādhana of the supremely noble
‘Natural Liberation of Suffering’ was spoken by the Venerable Mahāguru to the Sovereign
Dharma King and the princes in [Samye's] middle-storey shrine room called Blazing Turquoise;
it was placed in a casket of heart treasures, and entrusted with powerful aspirations.
The time for revelation came in the Earth Tiger year (1758), when I had a vision of the Great
Compassionate One, and the ḍākinī of the space of wisdom entrusted me, in the vast expanse
of the illusory net, with the scrolls of the symbolic script of the radiant expanse. I
wrote it down without concealing anything of the signs and meaning.
Great Dharma protector Zadü Rāhula, unwaveringly protect this essence of the most profound of
treasures! Samaya!
I kept the seal of secrecy for seven years before I wrote it down. These instructions are more
precious than my very own heart.

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Paul Keller, 2019, with reference to ‘Commentary on the
Difficult Points’ by Jigme Lingpa, and previous translations by Philip Richman and Ane Tsöndrü.
↑ The 'Pratri' Commentary that Lays Bare the Pith Instructions, Tib. pra khrid dmar byang gnad
yig↑ Skt. amṛta↑ Skt vīra; Tib. dpa’ bo↑ Skt. siddhi.↑ Skt. Nirmāṇarataya.↑ This means
that one multiplies the time required for the number-based approach phase by four. For example
if it would take four months to complete a certain number of recitations, the time-based
approach phase would last sixteen months.↑ The 'Pratri' Commentary that Lays Bare the
Pith Instructions.