Training in the Pure Realms of the Three Kāyas
A Prayer and Aspiration
by Rigdzin Jikmé Lingpa

kyema kyi hü rikdzin pema jung
Kyema Kyihü! O Lotus-born, master of pure awareness,
dak dra lé ngen nyikmé semchen nam
Sentient beings like me in this degenerate age possess evil karma.
dewa dö kyang dukngal dön du nyer
When I yearn for happiness, yet contrive to create only suffering,
nyingrü chin chi lok nam su la ré
When my every effort is completely wrong, who can I turn to?
tukjé zik shik ngayab lingpa khyen
Look on me with compassion, you who dwell in Ngayab Ling—Care for me, guide me, inspire me,
make me one with you.
danta nyi du zangdok palrir drong
Lead me, right now, to the Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!

tukjé denpé gyalwa khyé tabü
Even an enlightened being, as compassionate as you,
bö bang bor né ngayab ling du shek
Left the Tibetans behind, and departed for Ngayab Ling.
dong mar bö truk treü tsawo nam
Yet for the children of Tibet, descendants of the monkey,
dichi ré tö kyabné su la ré
You are our only refuge, in this life and the next: so who can I turn to?
tukjé zik shik ngayab lingpa khyen
Look on me with compassion, you who dwell in Ngayab Ling—Care for me, guide me, inspire me,
make me one with you.
danta nyi du zangdok palrir drong
Lead me, right now, to the Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!

tsesok mi tak yangkhé jé'u dra
Life is precarious, like a chick perched on the edge of a cliff.
donub tsam yang mi chi deng nimé
There’s no certainty that death will not come tonight.
taktu dö drab jepa dü kyi lü
Planning to live forever, I am caught by the demon of distraction,
shinjé ponya jung na su la ré
And when the henchmen of the Lord of Death come by, who will I turn to then?
tukjé zik shik ngayab lingpa khyen
Look on me with compassion, you who dwell in Ngayab Ling—Care for me, guide me, inspire me,
make me one with you.
danta nyi du zangdok palrir drong
Lead me, right now, to the Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!

khorwé semchen dukngal lé la yeng
We sentient beings in samsara are addicted to actions that bring suffering:
damchö jé lo namlang kar tar yal
Any intention to practise the Dharma fades like the stars at dawn,
dön chung yengwé kholwor mitsé zé
And our lives are wasted, squandered in slavery to trivial things.
dra chen chiwa jung na su la ré
When death, the greatest foe of all, arrives, who then can I turn to?
tukjé zik shik ngayab lingpa khyen
Look on me with compassion, you who dwell in Ngayab Ling—Care for me, guide me, inspire me,
make me one with you.
danta nyi du zangdok palrir drong
Lead me, right now, to the Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!

jipé rangshyin sosö kyewo kün
We ordinary people have the mentality of infants,
tö sam gompé natsö ché cher gü
The older we get, our study, contemplation and meditation steadily grow more feeble.
parchin druk gi dren jé ché ré long
And the eyes of the six perfections go blind.
jungwa timrim jung na su la ré
But when the elements dissolve, one by one, who can I turn to then?
tukjé zik shik ngayab lingpa khyen
Look on me with compassion, you who dwell in Ngayab Ling—Care for me, guide me, inspire me,
make me one with you.
danta nyi du zangdok palrir drong
Lead me, right now, to the Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!

gé chü lam la möpé shyuk na yang
We might aspire to the path of virtue and devote ourselves to it,
nampar ché na chö gyé zob dang dré
And yet if we look, we’ll see our practice is a sham, riddled with the eight worldly obsessions.
mi gé nammin ma tsor shukkyi go
The results of our harmful acts are ripening, without our even noticing, and because of this,
bardor nyal tak chö dü su la ré
In the bardo state, our decision is made—we are bound for the hell realms. Who can I turn to
then?
tukjé zik shik ngayab lingpa khyen
Look on me with compassion, you who dwell in Ngayab Ling—Care for me, guide me, inspire me,
make me one with you.
danta nyi du zangdok palrir drong
Lead me, right now, to the Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!

kyema nam shyik tsé yi penpa zé
Kyema! When my life force is spent,
lü kyi dang shor uk kyi ngar dra tsek
The vital glow slips from my body, and breath comes in gasps, one upon the other,
dek jé lung drö ngar kechen gyi rö
When the inner supporting air withdraws, and my weak and groaning corpse severs
nyedrel dung sem dreltak chöpé tsé
The links between me and loved ones in their grief,
né chö dukngal drakpo mi jung shying
Let me not suffer the fiercest agony, at the final moment of death,
khandrö suwé nangwa sharwar shok
But instead behold the ḍākinīs come to bid me welcome.

kyi hü sa chu mé lung namkha té
Kyihü! Earth, water, fire, air and space: as the five elements
jung ngé timrim duwa mikgyu dang
Dissolve one by one, the visions of smoke, mirages,
mekhyer marmé nangwa salwé jé
Sparks and lamps becomes clear, and thereupon unfolds
trawé timrim nang ché tob sum té
The subtle dissolution of appearance, increase and attainment.

ditar namshé nangwa la timpé
And so, as consciousness dissolves into appearance,
trinmé kha la nyida zé zin tar
Like an eclipse in a cloudless sky,
marlam char shying mar cha nyingar dok
The red experience dawns, and red essence rises to the heart.

dé jé nangwa chepa la timpé
In turn, as appearance dissolves into increase,
karkhung nang du dazer sharwa tar
Like moonbeams slanting through a skylight,
karlam char shying kar cha turdu bab
The white experience unfolds, and white essence descends.

dené chepa nyertob la timpé
Then, as increase dissolves into near attainment,
trinmé namkhar sö mün trikpa tar
Like the darkness at dusk on a clear and cloudless night,
naklam shar né künshyi ngang du gyal
The black experience draws in, and I sink into the ālaya, the ground of all.
laryang sokdzin lung gyé gyepa yi
Once again, with the eightfold separation of the life-supporting wind,
chungzé gyal sang dömé yé dang shar
I awaken slightly from unconsciousness, and the original primordial radiance dawns,
sal la ma gak tön gyi namkha shyin
Clear and unobstructed, like a limpid autumn sky.

tong sal drib yok dralwé ngang la né
While I rest in this state of empty cognizance, free from all obscuring veils,
detsé dante kadak lodral ying
In this moment, may I realize the primordial purity of nowness, the space that is free from
conceptual mind,
tamal shepa zangka gya yen la
As 'ordinary' awareness, fresh, vast and boundless.
ngepa nyé dé nyampar shyakpé tü
And through the power of meditating in that state,
dömé shyi ying nangsal sangwé bub
In that very instant may I seize the stronghold of
khyechö drukden kunzang gongpé long
The space of the primordial ground, the secret depth of inner luminosity,
kechik nyi la tsensa zinpar shok
The vast expanse of the wisdom mind of Samantabhadra, endowed with its six special qualities!

galté bardo dangpor ma drol na
If I am not liberated in this, the first bardo,
ying nang lhündrub ösal la tim né
The appearances of space dissolve into spontaneously present luminosity,
dra özer dang tsombü kyilkhor sok
And when sound, light, rays, mandala patterns and the like arise—
tim luk gyé kyi nangwa charwé tsé
The visions of the eightfold process of unfolding—
chönyi bardor rangnang ngoshé né
May I recognize them as my own appearances in the bardo of dharmatā,
ma pang bu juk tabur drolwar shok
And be liberated, like a child leaping into its mother’s lap.

detsé dra yi jik té zer gyi ngang
Yet if I am shocked by the sounds, terrified by the rays,
ku yi nangwé trak té ma drol na
Frightened by the appearances of deities, and liberation eludes me,
chönyi denpa lamé jinlab kyi
Then by the truth of the nature of reality, and through the blessing of the master,
trulpa milam sepé cha tsam lé
At the moment of awaking from this dream of delusion,
rangshyin tulkü shyingkham peme bub
May I be inspired and liberated, miraculously born
dzü té kyé né ukyung drolwar shok
In the heart of a lotus flower in a natural nirmāṇakāya realm!

rim gü tekpa kün lé depé dön
Through the power of entering the path of the Clear Light Dzogpachenpo,
ösal dzogchen lam la shyuk dé tü
The truth that surpasses all the nine graded vehicles,
nam shyik dömé lhum su shyukpé tsé
After I enter the womb of the primordial,
gangi drol tsé dra ö sa yö dang
May all the signs of liberation: sounds, lights, earthquakes,
rik ngé dung dang shyitrö nangnyen sok
Relics of the five families, forms of the peaceful and wrathful deities, and the like
kün gyi tün nang drub tu ngönpar shok
Become visible for all to see.

rikdzin dak gi lhaksam namdak dang
By the power of the extraordinary pure intention I possess as a vidyādhara,
chönyi rangshyin chiyang mayinpé
By the power of the truth of the nature of reality, which is free from being anything in and
of itself,
denpé tu yi kham sum yichen dang
May sentient beings of the three realms of existence, and especially
khyepar drelwé düpé semchen kün
All who are connected in any way with me,
ku shyi shyingkham mejung nyamgawar
Be liberated, altogether, all at once
tsombu chik tu chamchik drolwar shok
In the wondrous pure realms of the four kāyas, full of joy!

Once I was alone in solitary retreat in ‘The Akaniṣṭha Vajra Cave’, a hermitage blessed by the
naturally arising enlightened speech of Padmasambhava, when early one morning, I caught
sight of Mount Hépori and thought: “Wait…It was on that hilltop just over there that Khenpo
Śāntarakṣita, the master Padma, the King and the disciples once walked, subjugated gods
and ghosts, and relaxed. Many are the tales that appear to that effect. But now, apart from
their names, not a single trace of them remains.” I was gripped by a conviction that in
the very same way, everything is transient, impermanent. And although I had reckoned on staying
alive, and not dying, for a few years more, what certainty was there that I would not
leave for my next life the very next day? This train of thought filled me with haunting
sorrow and aching weariness, and a sense of renunciation that was boundless. The memory of
Guru Rinpoche, the King and the disciples plunged me into floods of tears. And this was
why, at that moment I, Chatral Khyentsé Özer, wrote this ‘Prayer and Aspiration to Training
in the Pure Realms of the Three Kāyas’: a prayer invoking and imploring Guru Rinpoche, coupled
with an aspiration prayer suitable for daily recitation based on the root words of
the way to attain liberation through the experiences of the bardo states.

| Translated by Rigpa Translations