Transference: Enlightenment Without Meditation
from The Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse
revealed by Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa

Homage to the expanse of the view!
The path of the clear light Great PerfectionIs the natural freedom of the dharmakāya, beyond
objective.Someone who captures this strongholdIs beyond that which is transferred and the
act of transference.Yet for those who prefer elaborate means of attaining nirvāṇa,The ‘Transference:
Enlightenment without Meditation’ is taught.The preliminaries, refuge and bodhicitta
are done in the general way.Whether practising for yourself or for another,It is crucial
to incorporate the four immeasurables.For the main practice, visualise yourself as Vajrayoginī,According
to the outer practice of Guru Yoga, then continue with:
dé yi khong ü tsa uma
In the middle of her body runs the central channel
bom tra da nyuk tsampa la
As thick as a hollow reed arrow,
tong sal ö kyi bugu chen
Empty and clear like a tube of light.
yar né tsang buk né su har
Its upper end is open at the brahma-aperture,
mar né té wo zukpa yi
And its lower end extends below the navel centre.
nyingkhar tsik gi chépé teng
Upon the notch at the heart-centre,
lung gi tiklé jang kyé ü
In the centre of a light green sphere of inner air (lung)
rikpa hrih yik marpor sal
Awareness clearly appears as a red syllable Hrīḥ.
chiwor tru gang tsam gyi teng
A forearm’s length above the crown of one’s head
sangyé nangwa tayé ni
Appears the Buddha Amitābha, ‘Limitless Light’,
tsen pé dzokpé pungpor sal
Complete with all the major and minor marks.
Pray with fervent devotion. Not allowing the mind to wander elsewhere,And with single-pointed
aspiration. Recite “Hrīḥ Hrīḥ” from the upper palate,Recite them five times together,While
holding your upper body tight and your head upright.Awareness is in the form of a red syllable
Hrīḥ,Lifted like paper carried on the wind,Rising ever higher and higher.With a loud
“Phaṭ!” it shoots up like an arrowAnd dissolves into Amitābha’s heart.Through training
like this repeatedly,Signs of proficiency will arise: the brahma-aperture will tremble;The
head will ache; a drop of serum, shining like dew, will appear;And it will be possible to
slowly insert a grass stalk.
dé tsé öpakmé pé ku
Then, the form of Amitābha
ö du shyu né rang la tim
Melts into light and dissolves into me.
kyen dé kechik dren dzok su
Through that, I too become Amitāyus,
rang yang tsé pakmé du gyur
Perfect in the very instant of recollection.
Recite the amaraṇi mantra one hundred times. Dedicate the virtue and make prayers of aspiration.This
will not damage your life.In fact, due to the truth of interdependence, it will pacify
obstacles to life.This secret mantra path is superior in its methods,So guard the crucial
points of Transference: Buddhahood without MeditationAs dearer than your own heart or
eyes!Samaya!
Prayer
emaho
Emaho!
né rang nang dön gyi womin na
In the self-appearing realm, the ultimate Akaniṣṭha,
yi dé gyé ja gur trikpé long
Is an expanse that teems with rainbow light of intense devotion.
kyap kundü tsawé lama ni
Here, the embodiment of all objects of refuge, one’s own root guru,
ku tamal ma yin dangmé lü
In an extraordinary form and with a radiant body,
pal sangyé nang té ngowor shyuk
Abides as the essence of Buddha Amitābha.
yi mö gü dungwé solwa dep
With intense devotion, we pray:
lam powa jongwar chin gyi lop
Inspire us to accomplish the path of transference!
né womin dröpar chin gyi lop
Inspire us to reach the realm of Akaniṣṭha!
ying chö küi gyal sa zinpar shok
May we capture the domain of dharmakāya expanse!
p’et p’et p’et p’et p’et
Phaṭ! (Nirmāṇakāya) Phaṭ! (Sambhogakāya) Phat! (Dharmakāya) Phat! (Unchanging Vajrakāya) Phaṭ!
(Abhisambodhikāya)

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018. Revised with assistance from Gyurme Avertin, 2021.

Version: 1.3-20211018